MASTER: Carlo Giuseppe Colombani
SOURCE BOOK: carlo giuseppe colombani__l'arte_maestra
FIELD NAME: TranscriptionbyPiermarco Terminiello
TOTAL TEXTOS: 31
================================================================================

[1] (P0.S0)
[ 1 ] THE MASTER ART OF GIUSEPPE COLOMBANI KNOWN AS THE LOMBARD STANDARD-BEARER In which every person can easily learn to handle the Sword, Dagger, Targe, Halberd, Banner, and Two-Handed Sword by themselves, along with the rules that each person must follow when finding themselves with a naked sword to guard themselves well and defend.

[2] (P1.S0)
[ 2 ] TO THE READER.

[3] (P1.S1)
To you, benign Reader, I dare to present before your eyes this my feeble work, though it may be true that a small offering is not unworthy of great minds. Therefore, I hope you will graciously consider this small effort of mine, which I trust you will deem worthy to read, and you will find it to be a necessary work for all those who seek to defend and safeguard their lives by following the true path to acquire the true art and knowledge of the Sword. I can only tell you that I have labored throughout my youth, having practiced under good and virtuous Masters. However, I do not claim to speak except under the disciplines of most virtuous men. Thus, I wish to make known to all those who long to learn all the rules of the Sword—not all, but the most essential and principal ones—that everyone must know to protect themselves, both with the Sword alone, and with Sword and Dagger, Sword and Shield, Sword and Cloak, and how to conduct oneself in night skirmishes, how to regulate oneself, how to win without doubt against one who is bold and lacks the true knowledge of the Sword, and how to comport oneself when assailed by one wielding a Spear or Halberd, defending oneself with the Sword and overcoming him.

[4] (P1.S2)
How you must use the Halberd against the Sword, how you must handle the Two-Handed Sword or Long Sword amidst more Swords.

[5] (P1.S3)
The method is the true rule for wielding the poles to play the Banners, and the Pike, and the true knowledge of what is the best position of all, having practiced them all, and how you must conduct yourself when playing against other nations, as you must do when it happens to engage in a contest against the Sabola, how you must regulate yourself against the capture or disarming.

[6] (P1.S5)
And live happily.

[7] (P2.S0)
Easy way to learn to strike well.

[8] (P2.S1)
And to properly handle arms, it is necessary that the Scholar applies himself and takes the trouble; however, it is neither his spirit nor his skill that will make him proficient, but only a little judgment, for the spirit and swiftness serve little without the art.

[9] (P3.S0)
Because if sometimes a blow is struck, it is not by chance, but to give an easy way for the Scholar to properly wield the weapons, one must first position him well over his legs, and make him walk in small and large steps, both forward and backward. Then, he must be made to understand the strong and weak of the Sword, and then taught what fourth, third, and second mean. When he can recognize the movement of thrusts, he must be placed in the natural guard, making him aware that there should be a distance between the left foot and the right foot of two feet, the left knee slightly bent, and the right leg fully extended, the hips squared, and the body straight, with the left hand in a circular manner at the height of the eye: in that position, he will extend the fourth strike, making it start at the same time as the hand. Then, have him bend the right knee, with the left leg extended, in case the hand needs the foot to reach the body of his enemy; he will be made to bring the right foot forward half a foot, and when the Scholar is in that situation, he will be shown that the thrust is executed by turning the fingers of the right hand upward, and those of the left downward, both arms extended above the same line equally high, and equally above the line of the foot; the head slightly inclined outside of the Sword. And when you have made him observe these rules, you will have him extend the Third, always starting from the hand, and not running, but the foot, which, as I have already said, when the hand needs it, making him observe that the fingers of the right hand are turned toward the ground, and those of the left toward the Sky, the head situated along the line of the arm directly above the knee, for if it is not above the knee, he will inevitably drag the body to the ground, a thing I have seen many times in the Salle; then you will show him to execute the Second, which is properly a reversed fourth that is struck below the line of the arm.

[10] (P3.S1)
These are the three main strikes that the Scholar must learn well; there are others called quints, but it is not too necessary to make them observe these at the beginning of their training, which I will discuss later when they become relevant. Once the Scholar stands firm and understands the movement of these three strikes, and knows how to execute them perfectly, you will introduce them to the parries and the strikes needed for all the parries. First, you will have them observe how to perform the parry of the strong of the Sword, from inside the weapon, which is done by raising the hand. The strike for that parry is a half strike that is executed in two times; otherwise, you will have them observe the fourth broken strike, which you will have them practice for eight days. And when you see that they are proficient in the function, you will show them this half strike for the parry of the point of the Sword.

[11] (P3.S2)
You shall make this known to the Scholar, and the strikes that are necessary for this guard, and a feint from within the arms, and strikes from below otherwise known as a feint of the fourth, and striking from the third; behold the guards that are made with the sword and the strikes that follow these types of guards, which you shall have observed, and practice for the span of a Month with your Scholar, and when above all through practice you shall make him aware of those above the sword, first those involving raising the arm, and you shall have him observe that guard, for with that guard one must make a feint to the head, and strike the second mentioned, and when he knows everything very well you shall make him aware of the guard of the point from outside the arms for those guards.

[12] (P3.S3)
You will make him feint outside the weapons, and strike inside the weapons; otherwise, a feint of the third, and strike of the fourth. These are the principal parries and strikes that one must primarily learn as a Scholar to render him perfect before giving him other lessons, which must be parried from the heel, or truly from the strong of the sword, and always keep your eye open when you recognize that he intends to make an assault, so that you can correct him when he strikes poorly, and likewise place him in position before his enemy, and you will make him observe how to deliver the strike when he has struck, making him do it before you yourself.

[13] (P4.S0)
When then the Scholar has had reading for three or four months, you will make him understand the easiest way to strike those blows with more skill, and show him how to deal with those who flee, who run, and who go to the guard with the hand. But before coming to the play to better deal with such sorts of people, it is necessary to show the Scholar the way and manner of making an assault with judgment, telling him that he must never strike a blow without first thinking well, that is, when he strikes fourth or third, and that in his case, if his blow is parried, he should think of nothing else but to give the response, and observe well how his attacking blow has been defended. If it has been defended by the strong part of the sword, then after his retreat he must make his half thrust, and if it is parried, he should always think of giving the response. But if the enemy does not wish to endure entering into his measure, and this hinders his designs, he must observe that when he enters into measure, if his enemy were to depart, he should make it such to parry the blows and to give them vigorously the response. And when once the enemy sees that the blow has been parried, he can no longer strike so boldly, and he easily leaves himself in measure, and thus it is easy to put into execution his designs both within the arms and outside the arms, observing well the parries and the blows that follow, as I have already noted above. The Scholar who will well observe these warnings will not fail to become skilled in fighting against any sort of person, and he can make mockery of any posture. And when they come to tell me that the French guards, the German guard, and the Spanish guard are more difficult to beat than the others, these are all nonsense. The French, German, and Spanish have a body similar to mine, and if I can defend my body from a good posture, I do not approve that it is necessary for me to take their postures to defend myself from their extraordinary guards, which I have seen in many, and many, where I have made observations, that they have less strength within their postures than within those that I am about to narrate. The Scholar will come to know in the long run of his journey that what I am saying is truly true, but before coming to the blows that I am speaking of, I am laying down the foundations of the Lords Masters of this Ser Dom.

[14] (P4.S1)
In other parts, I have made use of those sorts of guards, I will describe the method as my little intellect suggests to me, on how to strike those sorts of people who flee, who run, and who defend with their hands. To those who flee, one must allow the sword to run along for a small step, keeping the left knee extended in order to be in measure to give them a strike, and in such a case, you will succeed. And to deliver a blow, do not fail to finish your strike, and if they strike, you must defend and give the response, and if they let the point drop low; and if they wish to raise the fist, you strike from fourth under the line of the arm, opposing with the left hand, when the blow, which is called fifth or fianconata, and if they hold the point high, when you leave from fourth, you turn the hand to second, raising the fist well; this is the strike, which is called first. If they remain against your sword, you draw and make your strike, and if they defend, you will then feint according to the parries they will make, whether inside the sword or outside the sword, or from second; the double feints are very good for those sorts of people, provided they are well executed. Here is the method and manner that one must use to provoke all surprises; one begins by delivering a strike while standing firm, whether from fourth or third, and if the enemy defends it, you will feign to give them the response, and you must watch how your strike has been defended, and according to the parry that the enemy has made, you will feign, and if your feint has also been defended, you will always think of the response, observing how your feint has been defended, and according to the parry, you will double your feint, representing the point where the enemy has defended. And if you do this by stamping your foot twice, the first stamping of the foot is done firmly, representing the point where the first feint has been defended, and the second stamping of the foot is done by advancing a small step forward, extending the left knee, marking with the point where the last blow has been defended. And in this way, you will never fail your strike, provided you do not act with too much haste, and you must have the arm well extended, for it is very dangerous to be caught at the same time if done foolishly. And for this reason, one must always act as if in a state of readiness, in doubling so that you can always be quick to defend against any case that the enemy may wish to take you at that moment regarding those who run forward. This is another way, for instead of advancing, one must make a small step back, and when you see that they wish to cut, strike boldly in the place where you see most exposed, and in that way, you will never miss your strike if you take your measures well. The sword is very good for these runners, who make two or three foot stamps; the first time with the foot firm, and the second time by advancing the right foot forward by a good half foot without moving the left, and with the arm long extended, and by repositioning yourself, you will not fail to mark, and you will take them at the moment they lift the foot in the place you see most exposed, whether from fourth, third, or second. But if by chance they come to seek the sword from fourth, you strike from third, and if you find it from third, you strike from fourth, and if they come from second, you strike from second. That cavation for those who defend with the hand cannot perform two actions at once, that is, defend and strike. And so when you recognize that a man defends with the hand, if he holds it high, and wishes to defend the blow that you want to deliver to his stomach, you must advance the hand presenting him a strike at the same time, and when you see the hand approaching, you draw from above by the movement of the circle, and if he returns believing to find it, you will draw from below by the same movement. And if he has the hand towards the belly, and still wishes to use it to defend, you will present the strike directly to the heart, and he will not fail to want to raise the hand to defend, and in that you will strike the point by the movement of the circle into the mouth of the stomach. And if he again brings the hand down to find it low, you will draw from above, and this is the method and manner that I have used, and that I have always found very effective for striking such sorts of people. But it requires great patience and much effort, for one must not believe that in a year or two one can become so strong as

[15] (P5.S0)
Method to defend oneself Against a Sabre with a Sword Firstly, if a man has skill with the Sword, he must hold his hand where he has the grip against the scabbard, at one foot and a half off the ground, so that the Sabre cannot strike his blade, for the Sabre seeks nothing else but the blade to disarm it, or indeed the hilt, in such a manner.

[16] (P5.S1)
He who wields the Sword must immediately judge, upon seeing one who plays with the Sabre, and must understand that they intend to strike, whether to the head or elsewhere, feinting towards the place where they know it can more easily penetrate, and then quickly leap back; for if the one holding the Sword is not very skilled, they run great danger, as the fury of the Sabre may bring them harm. Those who hold the guard in a straight line will always be at risk from the Sabre, if the one maintaining it has even a little knowledge.

[17] (P6.S0)
To defend oneself against a long sword, a man who has a short sword of about half a foot less than his enemy must not be frightened by the feints made by his adversary, whether in half strikes or challenges. As soon as his enemy delivers a blow, he must immediately resort to a parry and close in on him, or tighten his grip, and observe the openings while he closes in. And if the one wielding the short sword strikes at his enemy, he must immediately jump back, raising his sword away from him, for the one who has received the blow could still easily harm him. And if the one who wields the short sword, in his great spirit, wishes to deliver strikes in length, he runs the risk because his enemy holds strong due to the great advantage he has with his sword, for seeing himself oppressed by blows, he may not be able to defend himself, and the force would compel him to extend his arm to make a thrusting blow.

[18] (P7.S0)
To make use of the Grapple, the judgment must not fail him who wishes to leap upon the person, and he should not employ it except when his enemy, delivering a blow, stretches himself beyond measure; and seeing him thus late in retreat, he can take advantage of the moment and make use of the grapple.

[19] (P8.S0)
To defend oneself against the Halberd with Sword.

[20] (P8.S1)
The swordsman must be warned that he must hold the sword firmly in hand and take the sword with the left hand in the middle of the blade. If the enemy strikes from within with the right and aims for the waist, he should pull back and pass the left foot to the right and go for the grip; without any doubt, he will succeed.

[21] (P9.S1)
When the Scholar has a good understanding of the Sword alone, having had instruction from a good Master, he will easily be able to learn, in a short time, the Sword and dagger, the sword and cloak, the sword and shield, noting that all three are but one game, provided he secures his whole body over the left foot, and carries the sword with the right hand at the lowest position that can be used; and with the left, the dagger, which he should keep pointed at the enemy's throat, seeking to disrupt the enemy and allowing himself to strike straight, either from the outside or from within, which will be easier by having at least the first 15 days of practice with a good player to learn to parry with the left hand using the dagger, and thus you will do with Cloak, Shield, and Hat.

[22] (P10.S0)
Method of wielding the Halberd against the Sword or amidst a multitude of Swords.

[23] (P10.S1)
When it happens that you must dig holes in your shop or house, the Halberd must be taken with the right hand at the end of the Halberd, with the left in the middle, the right foot behind, and the left foot forward, retreating well back with the right arm. And when you thrust, you will immediately return with your strike, and you shall never strike with the Halberd when you know that the swordsman knows how to handle it, for he will easily come to seize you.

[24] (P10.S3)
The iron then, with the rising thrusts, turning around you with speed, you will be able to enter into the midst without your danger, the Halberd not being a palm higher than that which you wield.

[25] (P11.S0)
Rule of the Two-Handed Sword against Multiple Swords.

[26] (P11.S1)
Thus, it means a two-handed sword as well as a long sword, and if you find yourself attacked by enemies, and they are indeed in this occasion wanting nothing but desperate blows, that is to enter freely into the midst, and never strike with the point unless against one whom you deem weaker, but with reverses such cuts, keeping yourself always in motion, for this will be the true way to defend yourself.

[27] (P12.S1)
Throughout the world, which I have practiced, I have understood to speak of many cases, namely, that many without knowing the art of fencing have slain many brave men. Here I reflect and say that it may be, but not as easy as one believes, for better is the little knowledge than the great possession, for I may possess a great heart and not have the art; I say that the art can achieve more than a great heart, for having a great heart without stance, time, or measure, I shall never be anything good. I have always prayed to Heaven that when I have to draw the sword from the sheath, I would be sent a great heart without the art, and not a phlegmatic with more faults than I, for I say that when such misfortune befalls you, you can regulate yourself without danger. And this, first, you must avoid the occasion of drawing the sword with one who understands little of the art, for if he were to wound you, you would lose all your reputation, and if you were to wound him or slay him, you would gain nothing of honor. And should you find yourself in the situation of drawing the sword, never jest with him nor with cuts, for not knowing the danger, he may charge or let himself be met, and you may be disgraced. But I say that one must firmly establish oneself in guard and cover oneself, and if he strikes out of desperation, let him strike, and if he enters into measure, you must always retreat into stance, for in the end, having exchanged ten or twelve thrusts without understanding, you will either wound him if you wish, or you will take the sword from his hand by coming to the grip, leaving him as ignorant as he is, having however the reason, which is the fundamental basis of the sword, for it is said that reason conquers all. If this is true, I shall give a great counsel to all regarding a case that I have seen in N. of a great personage, who having fought twenty-four duels, all fully armed without ever being wounded, was deprived of life by a young lad of tender age, to his great shame. Thus, this case shall serve as an example to all, that whoever bears a sword at their side must be esteemed and always avoid the occasion.

[28] (P13.S0)
When the rib occurs at night.

[29] (P13.S1)
The rule for making a thrust at night is this: one never delivers thrusts except with the foot, and with the voice, and with the sword one seeks that of the enemy, and upon finding it, one delivers the thrust above his edge; and it is good to have the ferrule better than the Shield, to whomsoever knows how to wield it.

[30] (P14.S1)
First, the Banner that you will make must be as tall as you are, and it must be well balanced with both lead and wood; a span of lead should weigh as much as the entire Staff. And for all the passes you will make, always ensure to perform the scartosso with the Banner, and you shall learn as much with the right as with the left, and thus you will be able to learn to play with ease even two.

[31] (P16.S0)
THE END.

