MASTER: Salvator Fabris
SOURCE BOOK: salvator fabris__first_part_-_on_the_basics_of_the_sword_alone
FIELD NAME: Archetype(1606)[edit]Transcribed byMichael Chidester
TOTAL TEXTOS: 239
================================================================================

[1] (P5.S0)
[ 1 ] GENERAL DISCOURSE OF THE FIRST BOOK On the foundations of the sword alone.

[2] (P5.S1)
Chapter.

[3] (P5.S2)
Claro! Por favor, forneça o texto que você gostaria que eu traduzisse.

[4] (P5.S3)
WHEN WE BEGIN THE PROMISED WORK, we shall start with the sword alone, as it is from the knowledge of which the foundations of all other weapons depend. Therefore, many reasons will be understood, which can serve excellently, even though it is accompanied by the dagger or another weapon; and whoever knows how to operate it well will easily learn to operate it no less when accompanied.

[5] (P5.S4)
Therefore, it must be known that the rays of it have their foundation upon four guards, with which all postures and counter-postures are formed, and from them arise the times and counter-times, cautions, counter-cautions, re-cautions, and the committing of the sword. In summary, there can be no action for defense or offense that is not executed with the nature of one of these four, which are formed differently, as will be seen in the following figures presented by us, so that one may understand with how much variety of positions and perspectives of sword, feet, and body they are made. We shall also discuss the nature of each in its place, and the effects that may arise from them will be illustrated in painting, and the discourses will be such that one can easily comprehend when it is time to resort now to one or now to the other reason, and by what means, for greater advantage, one should go against the enemy to stand in presence, even though one who has knowledge may act as he pleases, for finding himself in any position will give rise to good effect through the understanding of measures, weak and strong, covered and uncovered. Nevertheless, it is certain that one position is better than another, and more securely can a man approach at distances when he carries his arms in the proper manner, whereupon, having arrived, he must operate differently according to the changes and opportunities given by the adversary, and according to the distances in which he finds himself, which are two, and what is good in one is not valid in the other. These distances are the masters of all offenses and defenses, as will be shown after it has been declared what the four principal guards are, and why they are called first, second, third, and fourth, and the derivation of such names. Once this is done, we shall treat the division of the sword and then the counter-postures, and the measures, and some other things deemed by us necessary and useful to the good observer of this art.

[6] (P6.S0)
DECLARATION OF THE FOUR MAIN Guards, and from where their names derive.

[7] (P6.S1)
Chapter.

[8] (P6.S2)
2.

[9] (P6.S3)
THERE ARE FOUR GUARD POSITIONS FROM FOUR PERSPECTIVES, WHICH HAVE the hand and the sword, that is, two edges and two flats, which thus create four different effects. The first is called the 'quelsito,' where the hand is positioned when drawing the sword from the scabbard as the point is directed towards the enemy (for we understand that all the [2] primary guards in the sword alone must be formed in this way). When the hand is turned a little downward, that is called the second; the third is when the hand remains naturally without turning it either to one side or the other; and the fourth is when the hand turns inward. This hand can only produce those four effects when turning it, and having it in the first position, it cannot move to the fourth without passing through the second and the third, which, being the last effect, acquires the name of fourth.

[10] (P6.S4)
The first is the most convenient for taking hold of the sword, although it can also be done with the second, and with the third, though not so easily; but with the fourth hand position, one cannot draw the sword from the sheath. It must be understood that nothing can be done which does not proceed from the nature of one of these four. We call it nature because one who considers well finds a great distance between one guard and the other, and this is due to the width of the blade and the hand, such that between the first and the second there is a middle position where one could stop the hand, and likewise between the second and the third, and between the third and the fourth. Therefore, it could be said that there are four legitimate guards and three bastard ones, because each bastard holds elements of the two from which it is formed. However, to avoid confusion with so many terms, we will only speak of the four legitimate ones, which will also serve well for those three bastard ones, because the quality of the guard is considered not only from the position of the hand but also from the effect of the point, which gives the knowledge of the strength of that guard. Thus, we must resolve ourselves to these four alone, especially since in fencing there are no other ways to strike, namely from within, from without, from below, and from above. There is also a great difference similarly between one guard and another, as will be shown when we discuss their nature, where various defenses and changes of strikes will be seen, according to whether they are formed long or withdrawn, high or low, and we will treat the nature of each one separately from the others.

[11] (P7.S0)
DIVISION OF THE SWORD To know its weak and strong parts.

[12] (P7.S1)
Chapter.

[13] (P7.S2)
3.

[14] (P7.S3)
The blade of the sword is divided into four parts; the first is the one that hangs closest to the hand, the second is the other quarter, which reaches up to the middle of the blade, the others are the last half, also divided into two, which goes up to the tip.

[15] (P7.S4)
The first part near the hand is the strongest for parrying; there is no thrust or cut delivered from any gallant arm that can be parried in that part, which the sword does not defend, and it resists without disorder, observing, however, the rule and the timing. As will be said, the second part is somewhat weaker; nevertheless, it also defends quite well when one knows how to parry where the enemy's sword has less strength.

[16] (P7.S5)
The third part is not good, especially against cuts, nor can it be employed against them, unless it is fortified with the enemy's body at the time; which will be explained, as will be understood where the defenses will be discussed.

[17] (P7.S6)
The fourth part is entirely cunning; one must consider having it regarding defense, although in offense it is the most powerful and the one that strikes most mortally. It is also true that when a cut makes a wound that meets with the third part and meets with the fourth, it causes a great offense, and if it were only of the third, it would not make half of what it does with the fourth. Therefore, the second and first parts should only be employed for defense, while the third and fourth are for offense, in such a way that the sword comes to be divided equally in defending and in attacking.

[18] (P8.S0)
METHOD OF FORMING THE COUNTERPOSES To understand how the weapons should be positioned and the body, and when one must begin to form them.

[19] (P8.S1)
Chapter.

[20] (P8.S2)
I'm sorry, but it seems that you haven't provided the text you want translated. Please provide the text, and I'll be happy to help!

[21] (P8.S3)
TO FORM THE COUNTER POSTURE, it is essential to position the body and the weapon in such a way that, without touching the enemy's sword, one is defended from the straight line that comes from the point directed at the body, ensuring that without making any movement of the body or the space, one is secure that the enemy cannot strike in that part. Thus, wishing to offend, the enemy is compelled to carry the sword elsewhere, and so their time becomes so long that it allows great ease in parrying. However, in arranging oneself in such a manner, it is required to position the sword in a way that it is stronger than the enemy's, so that it can resist in defense. This rule can be applied against all postures and enemy mutations, being accompanied by the dagger or another type of defensive weapon, as well as with the sword alone. He who can more subtly maintain himself in this counter-guard will have a great advantage over the enemy. Yet, it often happens that in forming it, the enemy forms another against it, and many times it is also necessary to create this counter posture far from the measure, so that the enemy can wait for the moment one begins to move the foot against him, and at the same time, as he approaches, change effect and close off the offerer of this rule with another counter posture. Therefore, it is necessary to be rich in options and to know at the same moment how to trot to another advantageous position to that of the adversary, and to create a new counter-guard when one is not so in measure that one could strike him in his mutation, or if the enemy, changing, has not retreated. For in such a case, even if one had been in measure, one would not have been able to strike him, but rather create another counter posture while simultaneously approaching to regain the same distance as before. It is essential, in forming the counter posture, to use a certain reasoning, that is, in positioning the body, one should be far enough away that the enemy cannot strike, or, having reached a distance such that the said enemy can strike by advancing the foot, to form it without moving the feet. For by doing so, even if the enemy wished to strike in that movement, one could parry and strike him, or break the measure, so that in this other way the enemy would not arrive. But if in moving the arms to gain that advantage, the movement was made slowly, one could then leave the initiated and strike at the very moment the enemy advanced to offend, parrying together, so that if the first movement is made without violence, one can leave the initiated and make another according to the occasion. Thus, he who wishes to approach with some security in the measures must first form the counter posture, and he who finds himself outside the enemy's counter posture will have more reason to break the measure than to approach until he finds the opportunity to gain the advantage.

[22] (P9.S0)
[4] DECLARATION TO UNDERSTAND of the two measures which is wide & narrow, & the manner to be held to acquire one, and the other with less danger.

[23] (P9.S1)
Cap.

[24] (P9.S2)
5.

[25] (P9.S3)
A WIDE MEASURE IS REQUIRED, IN WHICH, by advancing the front foot, a man can strike the enemy, in such a way that after forming the counter-posture not far away, one must begin to bring the foot forward to reach said measure. However, it is sought to remain alert, for if the enemy is stationary, at the moment one moves the foot to bring it forward, he may strike at that very moment. Therefore, one must move it very cautiously, believing that the enemy might make some effect during that motion; and after having made the counter-posture, one should seek to disorder him, if not by any other means, at least with some feint to then have the opportunity to strike him. And thus, while waiting for what may happen, one remains more vigilant and more easily resists encounters.

[26] (P9.S4)
Then, when one has reached the aforementioned wide measure, and the enemy moves their foot to adjust themselves, as long as they do not break measure, one can strike them in the exposed area even though they have not made a motion with their arms. This is something that could not be done if they moved, and remained firm on their feet, for the motion of the feet is slower than that of the arms. Therefore, the enemy could parry before the sword reached them, while they remained still. And when one does not know how to defend in any other way, they would save themselves by breaking measure in such a way that the sword would not reach them. And being already disordered, they would find themselves in danger of being wounded before they could recover sufficiently. When they give an opportunity without moving their feet, it would be more appropriate to approach at that time in the narrow measure, where the sword reaches with only the bending of the body, and without moving the feet, for the enemy would be forced to retreat to avoid remaining in such danger. And if they did not move, one could strike them, provided that the advantage of the counter-posture is maintained. One could also strike several times even if the enemy did not move, namely by understanding the distance from one’s own point to the enemy’s body, and how far from the strong part of the enemy’s weapon, having equal consideration of how much one should approach the point, or distance it from the strong part when striking. And knowing that the time taken by the adversary to parry is as great as that of one to strike, the sword will certainly reach first, since the advantage lies in having been the first to move. But seeing the body of the adversary slightly exposed, as can happen, because one guard covers more than another, one can then go to strike that exposed part, and at the time the enemy moves to defend, change the action and strike in the exposed area again. These reasons are understood after entering the narrow measure, for finding oneself in the wide measure, and wanting to go into the narrow, when the enemy stands firm in their guard, the danger is greater at that moment, for lifting the foot to bring it forward is a time during which the enemy can strike while retreating. Thus, when the motion of the extension is finished, the said person would find themselves far away, that is, in the wide measure, and so they would not have gained anything, and everything would proceed because the foot cannot move in less than two times: one in lifting it and the other in placing it on the ground. For this reason, some push themselves forward, sliding on the ground, which is good in halls, but in the streets, it is prone to falling due to the many impediments that can be found. Therefore, it is better to lift it, ensuring not to stumble, so that when wanting to bring the foot into the narrow measure, it is first required to have formed the counter-posture well, and then to place all the weight of the body on the back foot, lifting the front one, so that if at that time the enemy strikes, one can take the counter-time to parry and strike by properly placing the foot on the ground before extending that motion, which had been started earlier than what had been intended to better arrive in every case, that the said enemy broke measure in their striking. The enemy, if they had not moved, would, our observer would say, having lifted their foot, bring it into the narrow measure but in such a way that the whole body remained over the back foot, so that they would not come closer than they were before, when they were in the wide measure. And after placing the foot on the ground, they could then, with just the bending of the body, strike in every minimal motion in the exposed area closest to the point. And also, not wanting to wait, they could strike with the manner previously described. And if in bringing the foot into the said narrow measure, the enemy were to retreat, our person would still be in the wide measure, and would have to bend the body, which remained over the back foot, to the front, and then recover the same foot back after the other, always keeping oneself in the narrow measures in such a way that the body does not approach with the foot, but remains in the same position where it was before. And after stopping the foot, to bring the body, this reasoning is good to observe in every case of acquiring the narrow measure. But having struck, one must in recovering the arms always distance the body as much as possible, recovering the foot with such convenience that however much the enemy follows, one is ready to parry and strike. And finding that the said enemy always breaks measure, one should not rush to follow them, but rather at that time, it is sought to go more cautiously, for many tend to retreat, trying

[27] (P10.S0)
DISCOURSE ON THE THRUSTING OF THE SWORD, and reasons of two times to make known whether it is better to carry it, and observe the right time.

[28] (P10.S1)
Cap.

[29] (P10.S2)
6.

[30] (P10.S3)
THERE ARE SOME, WHO WISHING TO STRIKE WITH the point, thrust their arm with such violence to give it greater force; such a manner is not good for the reasons we shall assign later, for if the enemy, in that thrust of the sword, were to anticipate and defend the place where one intends to strike, one cannot leave that effect and make another, as would be required; thus the enemy becomes certain of the defense. And if he has recognized the weaker part and has pushed it, where nature leads, so much the sooner he will have made that thrust ineffective, and he will have defended himself very comfortably without exerting any force, because whoever pushes the sword from that side where it must naturally fall, it will fall more quickly and without any resistance. In this way, the weaker is more equal to the one who parries than the strong is to the one who strikes; moreover, in finishing the thrust, the point of the sword slips in such a way that it cannot go to strike, where rightly one has lost the aim, and also in finishing that extension, one cannot hold the arm and the sword from falling, which gives great ease to the enemy to strike. Additionally, after having thrust once, one cannot thrust again without withdrawing the arm anew, a time so great that if the same enemy had not been struck in the first fall, he could strike during this time of withdrawing the arm and even save himself before one could thrust again. And by having good ease to return to parry and strike, if he were to do so in two times, that is, first parrying and then striking, in such a way that the reason of two times would become quite good against a similar manner, and all the more successful, since those who strike with a thrust cannot make any pretense of strength that stands well, because in pretending they make similar movements with the foot or with the body, without advancing the sword, or if they do advance it, they often withdraw it much farther back than before, which was to strike with greater force, a time that is very slow and harmful.

[31] (P10.S4)
Now to discuss the reasons of the two times, we say that although against some they might succeed, nevertheless they cannot be equated to the reasons of parrying and striking at the same time, for the true and secure way is to meet the body at the very same point; for if it advances, otherwise it immediately withdraws and remains safe, and whoever follows it would give it the opportunity to parry and return to strike once more.

[32] (P10.S5)
We have seen through experience that most of those who observe the aforementioned reasons of the two times, as they may have the enemy's sword, usually strike it in order to then go and wound, which would be quite feasible were it not for the danger of being deceived, because the one whose sword is struck in the weak cannot certainly wound at the same time for having it disordered by the strike. But if it happens that the sword, of the other, which has been struck, not having found the enemy, falls greater, and offers the enemy an opportune time to wound, and even if one were to go to feign striking it so that said enemy would cause it to be struck then from the other side, nonetheless this would still be dangerous to remain wounded, for the same could have feigned to cause, and then return it, and in this way, the one who would have wanted to strike would not have been able to defend. Thus, it must be firmly held that one cannot strike another's sword without having their own removed from presence, and even more so not finding it, besides that sometimes one goes to strike the weak, as is reasonable, and finds the strong pushed beyond by the adversary, leaving the strike thus fallacious, and at that moment the same adversary comes to wound without being able to be impeded. But after this, having to deal with one who does not thrust but carries the sword, even if the weak is struck, nonetheless his strong does not move in such a way that he can defend, and therefore it is concluded, as much for these reasons as for many others that could be brought forth, that it is better to defend and wound at the same time, although with the mere sword great judgment is required to want to achieve these two effects in a single moment.

[33] (P10.S6)
As for the carrying of the sword, or rather to wield it better without comparison, it is to carry it, as will be understood, first because a drawn sword, while carried from one place to another, allows the bearer to let it go in the direction where the enemy strikes, which will then wound in another place, and the strong will always remain on the defense when the sword is played forward. Moreover, this person is certain that being drawn, it is also immediately made free; similarly, it is more useful to know how to maintain mastery over it, occupying the weak enemy, and to strike according to the occasion while always keeping the enemy's sword at bay, which if not freed by the cunning of that enemy, he will never be able to serve. Therefore, this reasoning can only be observed by one who moves the sword from one place.

[34] (P10.S7)
To the other without throwing it, and works in such a way that [7] he is always master of it, and if he wishes to make an effect which is hindered by the same enemy, he knows how to leave the begun action and make another; thus this one will strike at the same time that the adversary has wished to hinder him, and without deviating the point or withdrawing it, he can continue until he reaches the body of the said adversary, because the order he must keep is that while going to strike, or pretending to want to thrust or make another change, as long as he has begun to bring the point towards the enemy, it is necessary to continue until it reaches the body, for whoever wishes to hold it back in order to thrust or change effect would not have enough time, and this cannot be observed by one who throws, and therefore one can very well understand the difference, and all the more so since carrying it steady and accompanied by the foot and the body, the sword has greater strength, greater accuracy, and whoever carries it is always more master of it, not making any fall after he has struck, so that there is no need to do anything after striking except to withdraw the foot, unless he has passed, to elongate the body, and to return again to the acquisition of the enemy's sword, and in case the said enemy, in that withdrawal, follows to strike or approach, one can return to strike with the defense together, and all for the union in which he finds sword, feet, and body, which observation if used in the above-mentioned manner, the parry will be secure, just as in the reasons of the two times it is false, as will be better understood in its place.

[35] (P11.S0)
DISCOURSE ON CUTTING STRIKES To know how many there are, and in how many ways they exist, the nature of them, which method is better, and whether it is better to strike with a cut or with a thrust.

[36] (P11.S1)
Chapter.

[37] (P11.S2)
7.

[38] (P11.S3)
The MAIN CUTS ARE FOUR, which are employed differently, and they strike in various places, as will be seen through a figure that will be presented hereafter with all their names, which derive from these four!

[39] (P11.S4)
The main cuts, namely the straight cut, the reverse cut, the underhand cut, and the rising cut, are used in various ways, for some strike with the shoulder, others with the hilt, others with the knuckle of the hand, and others also with the shoulder, but with the arm extended, and it is important to always keep the point of the sword directed against the enemy. The first!

[40] (P11.S5)
Drawn with the shoulder, which is that for the point when the arm is raised, and a great circle of the sword is made to strike with greater force; it is the most wicked of all!

[41] (P11.S6)
Due to its excessive tardiness, and because one can easily be wounded when beginning to lift said arm, in falling, and after having fallen, since not being supported by the weapon or by the enemy's body, the sword passes behind the back, which cannot be held, or if it is drawn straight down, it may strike the ground with the danger of breaking. Thus, whichever of the two things occurs, so much time is lost that the adversary can easily strike. The second method, which is also executed with the thrust, brings the hand out of the line of attack both when lifting and when lowering, such that even with this second method one can remain wounded, but not so easily, because the sword does not make such a large arc, nor does the arm become so exposed when lifting, nor does the said sword carry so far when falling; and therefore, for the reason of quicker motion, and because the man remains more covered, it becomes better than the first.

[42] (P11.S7)
But the third way, which is done with the knot of the hand in such a manner that the arm remains always straight, even though the sword turns, is without comparison better than the two aforementioned, in such a way that the body remains more covered and one can be so much lighter!

[43] (P11.S8)
wounded, because it is very swift, and the point, when falling, remains in such a way that it can strike or cut. Everything can be parried from the strong, and another cut can be made.

[44] (P11.S9)
The fourth similarly, which is the one with the arm straight and rigid, is good for striking the first two, as it wounds without turning the sword, raising it little or not at all; the said sword is allowed to fall for the openings, and when the adversary turns the sword around to strike, the practitioner of this fourth method can let his fall into the opening he finds, which without a doubt will have wounded first, before the other falls, and all the more will he remain secure when he has acted with his feet and body, as is required, for if he remained upright when his sword falls, he could not arrive in time for defense, especially if the enemy's cut had been made with the elbow. But by lowering the body, the fallen sword is recovered more quickly, and it requires less movement to reach the said defense, for by striking with the arm straight and rigid without bending the wrist, the sword always remains in front, so that immediately after striking, it easily returns in a straight line. Thus, for this reason, the said fourth method proves to be better than the first two, and also to resist the third, although it seems to us that the said third is much more fluid, or less constrained, and without requiring such strength, and where more things can be done, and the enemy can be deceived more easily.

[45] (P11.S10)
But he who wishes to strike with a cut securely is of the masters, who waits for some opportune time, since in a small motion one cannot strike, for before the sword reaches, the time has passed. However, one can feign to put the enemy in servitude, and while doing so, strike him with the point, or feign with the point and strike him with the cut. Just as it would be necessary to want to move without waiting for time, since standing still, the said enemy would not be good for feigning a cut to strike with the point in regard to the length of the motion, in which a man could remain wounded. One can well feign with the point, as has been said, to give a cut, and also if the cut is parried, to strike him with the point. Similarly, feigning a cut when the enemy stands still is not good for the two times, as one puts oneself in the rising, the other in the falling, so that all the cuts are very long, and he who strikes with a cut will never be able to do so in the time that he parries (we understand with the sword alone), where the other always has the opportunity to save himself, and also to make another wound in the time that the first has wished to parry. It is true that in the said parry, he can put the adversary in servitude, taking away his power to do anything, and also wound him before he saves himself. But we reserve ourselves to speak of this when we treat of defenses and offenses, and because this cutting strike is not very useful, we will not extend ourselves except as much as we are compelled for the defense of this point and the offense of the cut. Still, it is good to know of both; in cuts, greater strength is sought, for they are very uncomfortable, and the sword, when it does not find an encounter, becomes disordered, the body sometimes also shifts, nor can it easily recover, so that it brings the man greater danger in this than in striking with the point, besides being of lesser offense, so that in all respects the said striking with the point is more advantageous, and also more deadly, for with the said point one strikes from further away, with more swiftness, and can also more easily recover. In summary, this manner of striking comes to be more noble and more excellent for finding in it all the subtleties of arms, whereas in the case of cuts, one does not find not only the counter-time but also the time, for most of the time two very long times are made, a matter of which we do not wish to reason more than what we have done in the previous discourse regarding the particular reason of the two times, but rather of the more subtle, more difficult, and more profitable things. For example, if two were to confront each other, one of whom was a good cutter and the other a point striker, without a doubt the latter would defeat the former for the aforementioned reasons, even though the cutter might be more gallant, in such a way that it concludes it is better to adhere to the point, especially in battles hand to hand disarmed, than armed we would consider it good to serve oneself of both, and thus against many, for the cut puts in greater confusion and in a single strike more blows can be parried.

[46] (P12.S0)
HOW THE PARRY SHOULD BE GOOD AND HOW IT IS FALSE And some who parry with the left hand having only the sword Cap 8.

[47] (P12.S1)
HE WHO CONSIDERS WELL THE PARRY FINDS IT 
to be a kind of fear, for he who does not fear harm would not put himself 
in defense, which can be called obedience and servitude, and it is all the 
greater when one does so out of necessity, for he who does not wish to be 
wounded is compelled to parry. Thus, when one can place the adversary in such 
an obligation of defense, we judge it a great advantage, for while he is in that 
necessity to parry, he can be wounded in the open, which happens when he 
moves, and thus being wounded, the defense becomes vain. Therefore, some say 
that the parry is false, which we confess, when it is simply employed, for by 
feigning to strike in one place and then striking in another, when the enemy 
moves to parry, he will have believed he is defending himself, and he will not 
have done so because he was deceived by the feint. In such a way, that it can 
be better to avoid parrying by letting the blows pass empty and evading the 
point; this is always better, we understand, with the sword alone, for with the 
sword and dagger one can parry with one weapon and strike with the other at 
the same time, and thus a man can save himself more easily. But with the sword 
alone, one must operate very judiciously, wanting it to achieve both effects of 
defense and offense at the same time, as is necessary, for the parry to be secure. 
And thus, being compelled to parry against some cut, it is necessary to go to 
defense with strength from that side where the enemy's sword is about to fall, 
and at the same time, the point must strike with such swiftness that it arrives 
before the said enemy has struck with the other, so that in striking above, he 
does not succeed in wounding. This can be very well observed, for the cut is 
shorter than the point; therefore, this is the true way to be held, and seeing that 
one cannot reach in time with the point, there is no need to parry, for it is a sign 
that the enemy cannot reach. And he who still doubts can delay with a slight 
retreat of the body by letting it fall, and then at the end of that fall, strike. And 
even if one still wished to parry knowing he could not strike, one must, however, 
carry the point of the sword as if one wished to strike, since this manner 
prevents the enemy from being able to change effect. And thus, freeing oneself 
from that servitude, the enemy is forced to go to defense from seeing the point 
come toward the body in time, which enemy, while entering into such fear, 
offers an opportune time to be wounded, in such a way that there is no need to 
parry unless one is not struck, or one does not show to strike to place the same 
enemy in the said obedience to parry, for he comes to free himself from danger 
and to put himself in it. And it often happens that he who wishes to strike with a 
cut makes such a wide movement that he can be struck and save himself before 
his sword descends, for, besides the fact that the cut is slower, as has been said 
before, it is also shorter, and this results from the knowledge of the enemy's 
movement and of the distances, according as the same enemy comes more or 
less forward. But when the line is so far that one cannot reach, one must show 
one wishes to strike at the proper time, so that the sword turns to make it fall 
with greater speed in order to then have the convenience of striking him in the 
open that will occur in that fall, which is understood at a distant distance, where 
one can do less of a parry. But at a close distance, a man can have struck before 
the opposing sword descends, being quicker to finish the motion of the point than 
that of the cut to strike upon the sword, in such a way that he who retreats with 
the left foot backward recovering the body would save himself, and the enemy 
would not reach. But it is true that the wound would not be so mortal, for by 
parrying more one can advance in such a way that he strikes with more gallantry, 
and one can even pass to the other body. But not wanting to pass, it is necessary 
to know how to contain oneself in such close distance, and with the feet in such 
a way that one can step out of measure in time to avoid being wounded. And all 
this results very well from the slown

[48] (P12.S2)
And because there are many who, although they have the sword alone in their hands, base their defenses more on the bare hand than on the sword, it would be good to speak a little about this. Let us say, therefore, that such a manner can more rightly be called that of the sword, as it is a glove rather than that of the sword alone, for they not only parry with the hand, but also seize the weapon and hold it firmly, which does not seem to us achievable with the white sword, that is, by the edge. It seems to us a miserable defense to secure oneself with a bare hand; however, we shall discuss this somewhat to explain how one should operate against such, and also to show how it is good to employ it for the safety of the body and of the same hand, and so that the enemy is less aware of it. And although it is true that those who use the hand can make greater movements with the sword, since the hand defends in every case that the enemy comes to strike, even when the sword is in motion, as it happens no less when one goes with the straight line to strike simply without feints, nevertheless it will not succeed when it is not used against the sword so straight, but a little angled upward, and just enough to know that the enemy cannot pass with the body or strike first, before the point has been directed against him; so that by holding the hand in this way, the said enemy cannot find it nor raise it while standing in guard, by being careful to go in an oblique line when one goes to strike, which greatly deceives the hand of that which it wishes to parry, because in its own striking the sword slips away, so that after having gained the enemy and finding the time and the opening, one can go to strike, making it so that in directing the point the sword always goes forward in such a way that, having finished adjusting it for that place where it was intended, the point is already raised, so that it will surely strike, and before the said enemy finds it with the hand, when he has not had time to break the measure, besides that one can operate with various sorts of feints according to the position where the hand is found. After this, it often happens that it is better and easier to strike those who use the hand than those who defend themselves with the sword alone, because they, trusting in the hand, do not take into account the strength of their own sword, and therefore do not seek anything else, but that the adversary does not seize it, and for this reason they keep it withdrawn, and in this way they make a greater opening, and therefore it is much easier to strike them and save oneself before they have finished extending theirs to find it so withdrawn and far from the place where one must strike. And it is even more effective against those who first parry with the hand and then strike with a thrust, and most of those who base their reasons in such a defense do so. However, those who have the true manner, even if they use the hand, carry the sword and strike in time, which is good to know how to do in case of necessity, but not fundamentally, as we have mentioned above. Those who know the effect that can arise from a hand can better understand the opposite, which is necessary, but by true rule one should never put the hand into action unless it can reach the end, or to the grips to come then to the matter of wrestling, which does not pertain to us, as we only wish to treat of defenses, of the ways of striking, and of the advantage of arms, and not of wrestling, although sometimes it happens by accident, as we shall also say something at the end of the book. But when one comes to such terms, one has already passed the greater danger, of which it is more necessary to treat in order to teach how to pass through it safely and with harm to the enemy.

[49] (P12.S3)
Thus, to show the true way of using this left hand, we say that when the said enemy comes to strike, it is necessary to parry with the sword and to strike, but it is indeed good, at the time this is done, to bring the hand to that part where the enemy's sword might come to strike, so that in coming, the said hand defends the body, and keeps the said enemy outside without striking it, and thus it will be good to act in any occasion, whenever there is time; this manner is better because the hand does not bring so much danger, and the body has greater defense, nor can the enemy easily notice it, because the sword does not trouble him, which if he comes to strike finds the path closed, and if he does not come, one can strike him without disordering oneself, so this is the best and safest way to employ this hand, the reasons for which, whoever considers them well, will find within them great advantages and subtleties of defense, that we leave many things for brevity, it sufficing for us only to reason about the more principal foundations, from which one can draw infinite better reasons one from another, this matter being so broad that it is hardly found a limit.

[50] (P13.S0)
THAT IT BE THE FINDING OF THE SWORD, How it is found, and when one understands to have found it.

[51] (P13.S1)
Chapter 9.

[52] (P13.S2)
THE FINDING OF THE SWORD WILL MEAN TO ACQUIRE IT, AND IT is almost like a counter-posture, although there is some difference, for many times the sword has been found against the enemy, where the line that comes from the tip to the body is not entirely covered, but there is indeed this advantage, that the enemy cannot strike unless he passes through the strong part, which is so close to his tip, that it is found in time, when he wishes to move to make the thrust, that the counter-posture is not understood to be well made unless it is entirely defended from that side, which comes from the tip to the body, but it is well employed the same, advantage of the weak and strong, and for this the sword is understood to be found when one knows to have it stronger than the enemy, in such a way that it cannot be repelled, but rather that it can repel the adversary, and to better understand this; Being the man in guard, and wishing to acquire the enemy's sword, he makes it a practice to bring his tip toward the other with the fourth part in the fourth part of the said enemy, but with somewhat more of his in that of the enemy, because that more, that he will have of his in the other, even if it is little, will suffice to serve the advantage, when however the said enemy has been found in the weaker, and this must be noted, because the sword is always stronger from that side where the tip bends, and to wish to go from that side it is necessary to know how to adjust the body, and the sword in such a way that it is of the same strength as the other, and a large part of this reasoning consists in the knot of the hand, as will be shown in the figure that will serve from the inside to be the most difficult, one must not less beware of having the tip so far from the enemy's sword, that in wanting to find the said fourth part, the enemy does not have time to push forward the third, and perhaps the second part, in such a way that believing to have found the weak, he would have found the strong, which could happen due to the distance that was between one and the other sword, that as wide as that distance is, so much sword can be thrust against the enemy before he finds it, moving at the same time that he moves, otherwise he would remain wounded, furthermore if there were little distance between one tip and the other, when one moves to go to find the enemy, the other seeing this could make an angle, with which he would see to fortify himself, and to distance himself from that which approached, and if at the same time he were to thrust beyond to endure, while he was in measure, his strong would be so penetrated, that he who had moved to find the said sword could not defend himself, but would remain wounded, and moreover if the other made a body motion different from that of the enemy's tip, in going to find it, he could also pass to the body before the said enemy returned to presence, but to not wish that an enemy could do this, it is necessary first to consider the distance between one body and the other, and from one tip to the other, and then to move to go to acquire that enemy's sword, carrying the sword however without violence in order to abandon the first effect at the time that the enemy takes the opportunity and goes with the tip to the body carrying the finishing where he had marked to place the said tip, that will wound the enemy in this way at the time that he has pushed forward, being careful that this reasoning is understood, from the inside, that from the outside it is necessary to abandon the first motion, and lower the tip under the enemy's sword to the right side by carrying the finishing, where he wished to place that tip, that even in this part the present method works very well, also being careful not to touch the sword, when one goes to find it, and the closer it is, the better, and safer, and the advantage lies in having situated the sword with the subtlety of the strong against the weak, and it often happens, that seeing the enemy not being troubled by the sword, he does not realize that it has already been acquired, that by touching it more easily he notices, and has more opportunity to cause, or to withdraw, or to change the guard to free himself, in such a way that one comes to lose that first advantage, and furthermore if one touches the sword it would be impeded, and he would unbalance himself in such a way, that even if the time comes to wound, one cannot take for the resistance that the adversary makes, just as if one rests nothing upon it, and that the enemy causes it, one cannot hold the tip, which does not make a little fall, with which one loses

[53] (P14.S0)
WHAT TIME IS, AND WHAT COUNTERTIME IS, What is good, and what is false, and how the false time deceives, which the enemy often uses to create the countertime.

[54] (P14.S1)
Chapter.

[55] (P14.S2)
I'm sorry, but it seems that the text you want me to translate is missing. Please provide the text you would like translated, and I'll be happy to assist you.

[56] (P14.S3)
TIME IS DEMANDED BY THE MOVEMENT THAT THE ENEMY MAKES
within distance, for that which he does from afar cannot be called anything other than a warning or a change of perspective, for time in this art signifies the opportunity to strike or to gain some advantage over the enemy. The name of time has been given to the movements made in arms solely to indicate that by making some movement, that is the time in which, at that very moment, no other effect can be achieved; and therefore, in the movement that the enemy will make, if he sees some opening, and that one is ready to strike that part, the enemy will certainly be harmed, provided that this is done in measure, for two changes cannot be made at the same time. Thus, one must be careful that the time in which one wishes to strike is not longer than that which the enemy himself has to be struck, for in such a case he would have the opportunity to defend himself before being hit, and it would be dangerous, knowing the movement, for the action to succeed well. This is what is called the strike of time, and beyond the knowledge of the movement, it is necessary to consider the distance, whatever it may be, for finding oneself at a wide distance, even if the enemy makes movements of arms and body, as long as he does not move his foot, there is no certainty of being able to strike him even if he were exposed, for by having a firm foot he can break the measure so that the sword cannot reach him, and one would be in danger. Thus, it would be better to seize the opportunity of that movement and to bring oneself into close measure to be able to strike him surely at the first movement he makes as he moves to adjust himself in arms, and he will make some movement of feet and body, or feet and arms, and even if it were only with the foot, all are opportune times to strike at the openings, and it will always succeed better when the enemy makes the time unexpectedly even if he is not retreating. But it is worth noting that this will succeed even better if one finds oneself in a counter-posture, for as to the said enemy, having moved first, it is clear that he will not be able to defend and strike except with two times, such that the blow will be finished before he has defended, and one can break the measure before he himself has struck, as it is also clear that he will not be able to break the measure as he could have if he had been firm on his foot.

[57] (P14.S4)
It is also good sometimes to strike the enemy in this measure, even if he does not move from his foot; the reason is that if he gives time without realizing it, he will suffer what he does not expect for not having known that he has given the opportunity to be wounded, and therefore he will not be able to be in time to either defend himself or break the measure.

[58] (P14.S5)
But in this place, one must be warned that sometimes there are those who cunningly create time so that one may strike, and at the same time, while one is preparing, they have struck. This is called striking at the opportune moment, and each time one is struck or is wounded at the moment the adversary intends to strike, it will be called striking at the opportune moment. And sometimes it also happens that both remain wounded at the same point; this arises from the one who has not properly taken the opportune moment, or when they have given the time, it was in too narrow a measure, or they have made the movement too large. Therefore, wishing to escape the danger of this opportune moment, one must skillfully discern whether the movement to be made is so great that it can approach, and also if the enemy is moving insidiously to strike, for in this case, one should either not proceed or, wishing to strike, one must carry the sword for the opening created by the said enemy, who while moving to create the opportune moment must then change the effect to the second opening that will be made in striking at the said opportune moment, escaping with the body from the enemy's point. In this way, the deception he has attempted against others will have been executed against himself, and truly this art is nothing other than knowing how to subtly deceive one’s adversary.

[59] (P14.S6)
Finding oneself in the narrow measure, one can then strike in every movement and change made by the enemy, no matter how small, as long as it does not break the measure. For if, in giving the time, he pulls his foot back, he then lengthens that time in which one must strike; the enemy has much opportunity to parry and counterstrike, for having been the first to move, he is also the first to end the motion—a thing not achievable for him if he gives the time while remaining still and wishes to break the measure, since he would certainly arrive before he had exited the measure and would have been able to parry. Thus, it is not good to be the first to move while remaining in this narrow measure unless one is extending oneself. It should also be known that in said measure, one can often strike without waiting for time, solely for the advantage of the counter posture, and for the knowledge of the motion to be made in striking, and that of the enemy in parrying. Likewise, for the openings that are sometimes large, in this narrow measure one can always strike without waiting for time, provided one knows to have the point close to the enemy's body, so that the time in which one must strike is less than that in which the other must defend. Furthermore, one must also recognize that the enemy's weapons are so far from the sword that by pushing forward, it is clear that the said enemy cannot find it except in the strong, at which point the said sword cannot be deflected but will go straight to strike where it is aimed.

[60] (P14.S7)
All these reasons will equally serve in the sword and dagger, for the weapons are held more withdrawn, one finds oneself more exposed, and more places to strike, so that they will succeed very well, in such a way that it has been easily understood how dangerous it is to approach in disarrayed distances, and without some advantage, especially in the close measure, and it has also been seen how one takes tempos and counter-tempos, how one deceives some, and others, and which cannot be deceived.

[61] (P15.S0)
[ 15 ] WHAT CAVATION IS, COUNTER-CAVATION, RECAVATION, HALF-CAVATION, & THE COMMITTING OF THE SWORD & HOW, & WHEN THEY OUGHT TO BE USED.

[62] (P15.S1)
Chapter.

[63] (P15.S2)
11.

[64] (P15.S3)
WHEN THE ENEMY COMES TO FIND THE SWORD, or to strike it, and it shifts from one side to the other before he strikes it, at that moment one must demand caution of time; counter-caution is that which can be done in the time that the enemy causes, following the motion that has been begun to acquire, and letting his sword go behind the other, so that he will find himself in that same position where he was before.

[65] (P15.S4)
The recounter, then, is that which the first one could do, who has recounted, while the other recounts; that is to recount once more, and at that moment the counter-recount would be deceived.

[66] (P15.S5)
"Mezzacavazione is said to be that other when one does not finish passing from one side to the other, but remains down below the enemy."

[67] (P15.S6)
But to commit to the sword is that which one causes, and that which one returns to where it was before, when the enemy moves to approach the sword, or to strike; To want the caution to succeed, one must take caution beforehand, in such a way that once the caution is finished, the extension is finished when one wishes to strike, otherwise one would not reach in time, and by operating in the aforementioned manner, the enemy will not be able to parry, if one has acted in time. But if one has thought to come to find the sword, that if it were merely a simple desire to acquire it or to strike, one would certainly be wounded. And if in the said coming to find the sword he is firm on his feet, then one must take caution to find his own, and this is the time to counter-caution from the moment the other has moved at the very instant that the other takes caution, in such a way that if the one who first took caution wishes to save himself, he will recover and push forward, and will strike at the same time that the other wished to strike with the counter-caution.

[68] (P15.S7)
Others should find the sword firm on foot to make the enemy retreat in order to strike in a direct line before the retreat is completed. In such an occasion, if the one who has begun to retreat returns his sword to the position where it was before, bringing the point to the weak enemy, he will greet him and certainly strike in the very spot that the other believed he would hit.

[69] (P15.S8)
The half-caution is employed when the enemy comes so close that one doubts whether they will pass with their body before the caution is completed, for the point would remain out of reach and could not strike. Therefore, the half-caution is made to be quicker, and one remains under the enemy's sword to strike, lifting the body out of the presence of said enemy, as we will explain in its places. Such a half-caution is not always put into practice in the first moments, but most often in the second and third movements, according to what follows.

[70] (P15.S9)
They come by tightening the measures, and in the effects that will be in figure, the wounds of these cautions will be seen.

[71] (P16.S0)
[ 16 ] WHAT A FINTA IS, WHY IT IS SO CALLED, And in what manner and time it is good to use it.

[72] (P16.S1)
Chapter.

[73] (P16.S2)
I'm sorry, but it seems that you haven't provided the text you want translated. Please provide the specific text from Salvator Fabris, and I'll be happy to help with the translation.

[74] (P16.S3)
FINTA AND THAT WHICH IS SHOWN TO STRIKE in one part, and strikes in another at the time when the enemy wishes to defend himself, therefore it is necessary to know which are good, and which are not, because some make feints more with their feet than with the sword, striking the ground as much as they can in order to frighten the enemy, and at the time he becomes intimidated, to strike him. This sometimes succeeds in halls, and particularly where the ground is made of boards, which causes a rumble, and from this it follows that sometimes the other doubts, but on the ground that does not make noise, such an effect does not succeed, and also against those skilled in this art little or nothing is equal in one place as in another, because if such a strike is made at a distance, one should not doubt, since the enemy cannot reach, and even if it is made at measure, it is sooner that one can strike him at that very moment through the opening, or show to strike in that, and strike in the other, which will make him want to defend himself, because one can never defend one part without exposing another. And thus, he who has struck the ground with his foot will be deceived for not having noticed that by wanting to provoke the enemy to make time, he himself has made it for the enemy, who being still could better judge the actions than he, who was in motion. And hence it happens that feints succeed more when the adversary moves than when he stands still; Others make the feint with the body, and with the sword but do not extend too far forward so that the enemy does not find it in parrying to be able to strike said enemy when the weapons have fallen, or when he will raise them with fury for not having found the enemy. This reasoning succeeds when one has to deal with a timid person, or one who does not understand, because not bringing the sword forward, it is known that he cannot strike, and therefore the man should not move except to offend at the time when the other feigns, or should show that he wishes to strike him, because by making the enemy doubt, if he has taken the time, he will rush to defend himself, where there will be a great opportunity to strike him, and this will be striking in counter feint, because he who first feigned will have been deceived.

[75] (P16.S4)
Others still, who pretending, carry the sword forward, and when the enemy wishes to parry, they withdraw it backward, to return it with a thrust forward; yet this method is not good, rather it is worse than the other, because the sword should only make one motion, and here it ends up making three, one contrary to the other: the first bringing the sword forward, the second withdrawing it, and the third, the greatest of all, thrusting it forward to strike. And it is not noticed that their motion is so slow that if the enemy moves during the first motion of the feint, they will strike before the sword, which they have feigned, has finished withdrawing, and will comfortably evade before they can return to strike. But if one wishes the feint to succeed, it is necessary to advance the sword in such a way that when the enemy allows it to penetrate so much that the strong is recognized to have reached forward, they could resist the enemy's arms before they are prepared to parry. One must follow the path begun, so that the enemy cannot deviate the sword, which would wound them irreparably. And if, in making the feint, they move in time to parry, it would then be necessary to change the effect, and in that change, to continue always with the point forward towards the enemy's body to strike before the parry's motion is finished. And this is the true way of feigning, as one must also, when feigning, always believe that the enemy can strike at that moment, for whoever is persuaded that they are first to parry most often remains deceived. But judging that they can offend, they will be more ready for defense, and if that one does not strike, they will have done no harm and will have given the opportunity to act more easily. One must also know that feints should be made in closer openings rather than distant ones, as it is known that the sword cannot reach, and in covered positions, it cannot strike, where it is good not to put oneself in danger fruitlessly. But knowing the distances, the openings will not arise unless good effects, and acting in this manner, the feint cannot be so easily recognized by the adversary, for if they do not parry, they will be wounded, and if they do parry, one can still change the effect and strike. It will also be better done if one waits for the enemy to make some time or opening, for they could not judge otherwise than that they had taken the time of their motion, and therefore they would rush with greater haste to defend, and thus one could more easily wound them, but they could not at the same time strike, whereby they would be more secure.

[76] (P16.S5)
The calls are those uncovered, which a man makes when he is within measure to give the enemy the opportunity to strike, where one must consider the distances, and beware that the sword is not so close that it can arrive before the motion of it, called, is finished. As through these distances, one must also understand whether it is better to advance at the time the said enemy comes, or to withdraw to have time to parry and strike. Therefore, it is not good in making these calls to move the feet, for one would not be able to lift them in time, neither forward nor backward, besides which it would be dangerous to remain wounded due to the slow motion. But one can well make them by distancing and approaching the body according to whether the measure is wide or narrow, for the motion of the body is very swift, and he who does it as he ought does not impede the ability to lift the feet in time. And these calls should be made when one sees that the enemy has the desire to make a strike, to lose the greater opportunity to come and wound, for that desire does not allow him to recognize so well that such a call is made to deceive him. But noticing it, he could deceive others, as has been noted when one has dealt with deceiving time and the counter-time. And a call means nothing else than to give time and convenience to call, that is to provoke the enemy to strike in order to wound him, in such a way that when that enemy has the desire to do something, it is better to aid that desire than to impede it, for he will more easily fall into it. And it is much better to know what he wants to do and let him do it than to wait for him to do some other unforeseen thing, as often happens that a man remains wounded and does not know how or why the enemy has wounded him. It is indeed true that one must know the opposite of what one sees the said enemy wants to do, to better oppose it and offend him in time, and to save oneself.

[77] (P17.S0)
WHAT IT MEANS TO STRIKE FROM A STANDING POSITION And what it means to pass.

[78] (P17.S1)
Chapter.

[79] (P17.S2)
13.

[80] (P17.S3)
TO STRIKE WITH A STATIONARY FOOT MEANS, WHEN one strikes by bringing the right foot forward towards the enemy and immediately withdrawing after the strike, or that one strikes with the motion of the body while keeping the foot still. Passing is when one moves forward with both feet, continuing towards the other body; striking with a stationary foot is necessary to know as it is the most common practice in encounters, and therefore it should be the first exercise to learn how to advance well and extend a thrust, for the hand may fail, and believing to hit in one place, one strikes in another, depending on how far or near the distance is. This arises from the position of the hand which varies according to how much it extends or retracts, and then causes the sword to strike shorter or longer according to how the angle is aligned, and to wish to learn that one can reach from afar, it is necessary to accompany it by bending the body forward, and quickly recovering back after having struck, to save oneself from danger. But it requires practice to know how to adjust, a thing that, when well done, will be very beneficial, for it will make the body much more agile, ready the feet, and provide the judgment of distances, and certainly at that moment one will extend a thrust much longer than natural. However, to use this method of striking well, it is necessary to always find oneself in a slight step to be able to advance more in striking, and also, according to the occasion, to retreat by withdrawing the foot, while keeping the weight of the body on that foot which must remain still, so that the other is more agile and ready to lift. In these matters, it is truly not good to find oneself in guard on the left foot, for without passing one cannot strike from afar, and even one who would wish to pass with the back foot to return it would not succeed due to the long time it would take to go, besides that one would lean too far forward, to the point that one could not return it in time. For these reasons, and many others that remain unspoken, it is not good to have the left foot forward unless to wait for the enemy to be the first to come to strike, so that by retreating at that moment the left foot can be positioned to parry and strike him at the very instant. This is achievable because the body changes perspective and moves away while the right side remains forward to strike. But if the enemy does not come, one should not go to assault him; therefore, it is better to keep the right foot forward, for one can strike with greater brevity and more quickly save oneself by making the foot and body movement smaller. And indeed, after having struck, it is good to bring the right foot behind the left and continue with the left back to remain over the right, for in this way one will go so far that the enemy will not be able to strike unless he strikes by chance. This guard of the left foot will serve more in sword and dagger than in sword alone, but it is more appropriate to stand with the right forward, and immediately after striking to recover it with the left, for in this case, if the said enemy follows, one can return it again forward, and one can also similarly extend the left back according to how the opportunity is seen, and strike at the same time that the enemy follows.

[81] (P17.S4)
After these reasons, it is also good to know how to pass in a very profitable and advantageous manner, for it disturbs and instills greater fear in the enemy, strikes with more force, and shows greater valor; the body, the sword, and the feet are more united, which union generates strength and vigor in action, and in movement one can easily change from one effect to another, so that the enemy can hardly defend himself and has no opportunity to do many things, for the occasion passes quickly, nor does he have time to judge well; and once the point has penetrated, he can no longer strike. But in striking with a firm foot, it often happens that the man finds himself having advanced too far, either by having extended his foot too much, or because the enemy has also advanced, so that he cannot move beyond measure and gets wounded while retreating. In this case, it is good to know how to conduct oneself up to the enemy's body, for the greatest danger lies in arriving at distances; but once the point has penetrated, and continuing to the body, one reaches before the enemy can withdraw the sword, and it does not hinder to see many times that although the point has passed and the enemy is wounded, that enemy can withdraw it and strike, which is the error of the one who passes, who has not continued to the body, or has not taken the time well, for if the man passes at the very moment the enemy advances the sword, or that said sword remains occupied in defense, or is out of presence, that enemy cannot withdraw it in the right time that he passes.

[82] (P17.S5)
One could also say that if one passes, one should always follow the enemy, gliding along their blade, no matter where, in order to remain continuously defended. This can be done much better when the enemy retreats, as they expose themselves more, and the strong one goes backward, thus cannot resist. However, there are some who, although they have completely passed, retreat and strike, which is easier with short swords than with long ones. Furthermore, we say that whether they are long or short, when one passes, they should be able to keep close to the body, which will be safe, for in passing they can do various things: first disorder the enemy by striking them with the body, then take hold of the sword's hilt, and they can maneuver while passing right under the enemy's side that is in front, where the same enemy cannot retract the sword so much, being short, that without first moving away, they cannot do so in time. Moreover, while passing, one can easily engage in a struggle and throw them to the ground, which would be good, when the sword that has passed has not struck, for it must be held firmly. If one who passes were to strike, that sword would penetrate to the hilt, which would strike and disorder the enemy, and the wound could not be made in a place of such little importance that the said enemy would not be impeded at least enough that they would not have time to retract the sword. Furthermore, the one who passes is always in all cases more ready to take action than the other who is occupied in defense and confused by the danger in which they find themselves. After all these reasons, many other things can be done while passing that cannot be done while standing still. One can similarly use evasive maneuvers while passing, which cannot be done as well if the enemy does not pass. For wanting to lift the body away from the point, either on one side or the other, one cannot do so without coming closer for two reasons: one, so that one can strike at the same time; the other, so that the point passes forward, allowing the enemy to redirect it once more, where one becomes so penetrated that it is better to pass completely than to go back to avoid being struck by another blow before one has secured themselves. And indeed, with the sword, it is more difficult, and one must be more cautious, for after the point of the sword has passed, there is also that of the dagger, and thus the danger lasts longer. Nevertheless, there are many reasons to pass safely, as will be shown in the occasions of making strikes. And one who knows how to pass well will be more precise with the sword, constraining the enemy more, and is more certain of their own actions. Here, much judgment is required to maneuver the body and feet correctly so that the sword can do its duty, needing to be careful that when passing with the left foot forward, one does not bring the left side of the body forward, especially with the sword alone, for one cannot employ its strength, as one would find themselves too far back. Therefore, although the left foot must go forward, it is necessary that the right side accompanies it, for thus one will make an evasive maneuver, the sword will be stronger, and the point as long as if made with the right foot, for one can lean the body more. Thus, knowing how to operate while standing still is one thing, and knowing how to pass is another, with which double knowledge a person can do what best suits them according to the individuals and the times, for sometimes one can strike and cannot pass due to the brevity of time. This we mean while being fixed in presence, for there are also other ways of passing that can be taken in every brief moment, but with different reasoning, which will be discussed elsewhere.

[83] (P18.S0)
[ 20 ] OF HOLDING THE LONG SWORD, Straight & Engaged, & Withdrawn.

[84] (P18.S1)
Cap.

[85] (P18.S2)
14.

[86] (P18.S3)
THERE ARE DIFFERENT WAYS OF HOLDING THE SWORD, and the arm, as will be seen in the following illustrative figures, shows the variety of guards; and because one way is better than another, we shall discuss some of the more principal ones, reserving to ourselves the opportunity to speak more fully about the nature of the guards, according to what will be seen in the aforementioned figures, each one separately.

[87] (P18.S4)
Some hold the sword angled, with the arm slightly forward towards the knee and the hand in third, or they hold it outward towards the second guard; others keep the arm withdrawn, with the sword straight so that it forms almost a straight line from the hilt to the tip; others then extend the arm as much as they can, holding the sword straight in such a way that from the shoulder to the tip of the sword a straight line is formed. This manner is quite cautious because it keeps the enemy at a distance, but it is very laborious, and the sword is weaker than in other guards due to the distance of the hand from the body, and therefore of lesser strength, and more easily found by the enemy. And where the man must take great care to keep it free, when this is known how to do, it is truly a great hindrance to the enemy, for he cannot approach so closely as to strike without seeing a point too near, and he cannot advance for the same danger unless he tries to have it and push it out of presence, for even if he placed the strong part of his sword against the weak enemy and wished to strike, it would not be good, as the opening is small, unable to strike without passing with his weak against the strong of the adversary, who would easily defend himself. And he who wishes to strike below would also easily be struck above because he cannot reach the body without first having cleared that which is closer. And already it is extended, where to wish to strike more securely it would be necessary to remove the enemy's sword and take the time, moving the body out of presence either to one side or the other, and passing to the adversary's body, for one cannot strike unless the body has already penetrated the tip, so much so that one could not save oneself by retreating, and thus it comes to be better to follow forward. This thing would also succeed much better, as it is difficult, for one who plays so long and high maintains presence, given that with little movement he could exit while the sword is so advanced and so high, to which one can easily pass underneath by lowering the body.

[88] (P18.S5)
Although it is true that a body in this guard, properly positioned, must hold the sword so long, keeping a close stance in order to keep the lower parts distant, as those are more exposed and more difficult to defend, and also to advance further in striking, and similarly to retreat in case the adversary comes too close, since in this kind of guard it is necessary to keep him at a distance, otherwise he would easily find an opportunity to pass. For the same reason, one defends very well against cuts, because the forte of the sword is already pushed forward, where the enemy cannot strike without encountering it, wanting to wound, for whoever wants to strike below would not arrive before the one holding the sword extended has already advanced with the fourth part of his sword, and when the stance is close, it is even better to advance in such a way that the arm, which is extended outward, carries the greater danger, although it can be defended quite easily with very little motion towards that part, where the sword is, lowering the point more, it is less according to whether the cut comes high or low, by keeping oneself in preference; Certainly, a man should practice a great deal in this manner to learn to strike without extending the arm, for one must strike while keeping it firm, relying on the motion of the foot and body. One also learns to keep the sword close to the enemy, where one can strike with greater ease, and similarly to keep it free, for there are some who do not dare to advance it, doubting that it might be seized and impeded by the adversary, and no less one learns to keep the arm straight, which, being thus practiced, when the occasion arises, performs its effect more promptly and accurately, whereas the unpracticed often errs either greatly or slightly, and is not so certain in defense, besides not extending as much as if he had practiced in that.

[89] (P18.S6)
Then those who hold the sword angled in third with the hand before the knee, or with the second angled with the arm extended, hold the sword much more firmly in hand, but the body becomes too exposed, and the enemy can approach more easily; moreover, the third thus formed cannot cause harm to the enemy, because standing angled upwards takes too long; in the second, although it is well angled, it can easily cause harm, but each of them is apt for defending against those who know how to strike in a straight line, because they reach the body without getting close to the strong part of the angled sword in such a way that if one wishes to parry, it requires a great motion, and often one does not arrive in time, and even if one does arrive, it is done with such slowness that it gives the enemy the opportunity to change their action, either with another straight line or with an angle according to the opportunity; and because one angle passes very well over the other, straight lines cannot pass against each other in this way, and being of equal strength, both will go to strike, and if one strikes the other, it will be because the stronger one has better occupied the weaker, in such a manner that the weaker will always go out of line, and the other will go straight and strike; but one angle passes over the other and strikes without one opposing the other, rather they yield to each other, and in this way they pass very well over the straight lines, striking the angles according to the effects. Furthermore, he who plays angled wishing to make some change cannot do so without a long time, for it is impossible that his point does not make a great turn together with the hand, according to how it has moved, and it will make an even greater turn if it changes from one angle to another, much larger without comparison; if it causes the point, the motion would be smaller, if the change came from the angle and formed a straight line, but nonetheless this would still be a motion such that, finding oneself in measure, one would remain wounded; angles strike a lot, but do not defend, and whoever wishes to go against them must know how to use well the advantage not only of the sword but of the body and the foot, and to know well the strength of the angle; otherwise, one gets wounded and remains wounded. A better reasoning is that of one who keeps the arm withdrawn, and the sword straight, forming almost a straight line from the hilt to the point, and in this way one can better acquire the mounting, strike, and parry, and also on occasion cause harm with more swiftness, keeping the body more defended from the strong part by maintaining the point more easily in presence; it is also good to know how to serve oneself with one and the other manner in accidents, since he who does not practice them cannot know their nature so well, nor what can arise from them. One must remember well that one reasoning does not serve against all, but each has its own limit, and therefore what is good against one does not serve against another, so that, as has been said elsewhere, one must be rich in choices and know the time in which they must be employed. But wishing to position a body more securely, and a sword that stands better, it is necessary to keep the arm not fully extended, but rather that it has more of the extended than of the withdrawn, and with the sword in a straight line, or slightly out according to the position of the enemy, so that in this way the guard will be better and the body much more secure with respect to the strong part of the sword, which defends it with little motion, because it is already forward, and the sword is stronger than when the arm is so extended, and in any case the said man is more master of it, being able to operate more diversely, nor is it so obligated and so tiring, nor can it go under so easily as it does when it is played extended, and it can be positioned in various ways according to the occasion; and keeping the strong always in its place, one will defend oneself easily by employing it as it should be, so that this is better than the other for standing against the enemy, although our opinion is that it is little advisable to stand in any position, for although one is more secure than another, all nonetheless suffer a defect, and therefore the judicious man, seeing his adversary firm in any position, will not only recognize him, but will also know how to go against him and strike him; similarly, he will also recognize how much that enemy can do in offense and defense, for not seeing him firm, he cannot judge him so well, although from the first grip on the sword and from its bearing one quickly comes to the knowledge of the advantage, and we will reason about this in the second book, where we will make known

[90] (P19.S0)
IT IS BETTER TO USE THE, High body, or low.

[91] (P19.S1)
Chapter.

[92] (P19.S2)
15.

[93] (P19.S3)
TO DEFEND ONE'S BODY WITH EASE, it is necessary to know whether it is better to remain standing or to bend, and thus it must be considered that a body is much larger compared to a sword blade, which, although somewhat long, is nonetheless very narrow, and not sufficient to cover it. And as the body is larger, so much greater is the difficulty that the sword has in defending it due to the large movements it must make in defense, for the great and uncovered areas of the body. In this, some present certain reasons, saying that the body stands more naturally when upright, poses less danger to the head, is quicker to move, stands with less fatigue, and is not so obliged as when bent. We say that some of these reasons are true, and some are not; for one is in greater danger when standing, and cannot offend as much, because just as it is necessary to make great commotion in defending oneself, so it cannot extend the strike unless it bends the body, and bending it makes such movement that it can no longer recover in time. And even standing thus, one finds oneself disunited, nor has such strength, and the weapons similarly are weaker than when one knows how to properly number the life, and not standing with affectation would be more useful to remain low. But for those who do not know how to do this, it is better to stand, because those who stand violently in postures cannot be ready to move. Hence, a body well numbered in the angles it forms, bending and well positioned over the feet, is much safer when low, for it is less exposed, and with small movements of the weapons, it defends itself, and the forces are more united, which union generates swiftness and speed of movement. For those well accustomed to this bending, to want to do it as required is first of all a matter of need for exercise and effort, and then it is much quicker and more convenient, and one finds oneself more ready and more secure in every case, defending without disorder, and striking more swiftly and from a greater distance. The reason is that when a man is already bent, the body moves forward without making great motion. However, it must be noted in this place that it is necessary to position the body on one foot so that whatever has to move is free and can move quickly; otherwise, it would be slow, for the foot does not lift, nor does the weight lift. And although it seems that this can be done at the same time, nonetheless, it is slower. Furthermore, whoever knows how to unite well with the weapons and the body will carry less burden on the head, for he will be closer to the strong and quicker to pass either to one side or the other, and he will be able to distance himself more than when standing. And if a man could make himself so small that the weapons covered him entirely, there is no doubt that it would be well done; but since this is not possible, he should at least cover himself as much as he can and save himself, which will be greatly beneficial by ensuring to do so without impediment, and with such convenience that he can operate nimbly in all cases. And the effort that will be spent in exercising in this manner will always be less than the benefit that will be gained, dealing with the defense of life and honor at the same time. And whoever knows how to conduct himself with more caution and security against the enemy will be worthy of greater praise and will achieve greater honor, and it is clear that from a small advantage often depends a great victory.

[94] (P20.S0)
ADMONITIONS FOR KNOWING HOW TO GOVERN ONESELF, Against the great, the small, the weak & the strong, & how to deal with choleric & phlegmatic individuals.

[95] (P20.S1)
Chapter.

[96] (P20.S2)
I'm sorry, but it seems that the text you provided is incomplete. Could you please provide the full text you would like me to translate?

[97] (P20.S3)
WHEN A MAN IS TO GO AGAINST HIS enemy, he must subtly consider not only the nature of the foe but also his strength and size, for it is necessary to act differently according to the particular qualities of the one with whom he must contend. Therefore, we shall speak a little and advise on the best methods to be employed.

[98] (P20.S4)
A great one, therefore, who has to deal with a small one, must know his advantage, for being larger, he can reach farther away, both due to his size and the perpendicularity of his body, which, when bent, extends so far forward that he reaches the enemy, while the enemy cannot reach him. For this reason, it seems that he should pay more attention to the offense than to the defense, so that he does not need to acquire the enemy, even though it is good; rather, it is enough for him to keep his own free to strike when the said enemy approaches, and before his own body enters into danger. In this way, he should strive to keep the same enemy at a distance, so that he can never have his measure, for he must recognize the said great one, who, having arrived first within measure, and wanting the small one to close in more to acquire his measure, it is time for the great one to strike him or to disorder him by showing that he has taken that time in which he has moved, and then strike him in the opening that he will have created by going to obedience. He should also break measure immediately, so that at that moment he finds himself so far away that the said small one cannot reach him, or if he cannot do any of these things, it is good for him to hold back by breaking measure as much as the other approaches, so as not to allow him to achieve his design. This should be done until the opportunity to strike or to bring him to obedience is found; all operations must be performed without exceeding, only bringing the body out when the enemy passes, and also breaking measure, so that he does not pass but is held back and met by the point. In this way, the small one will have to use a new manner and not have the intention to strike but to defend, since the enemy cannot strike unless his body has entered into danger first. Therefore, it is more useful and necessary for him to focus on acquiring and occupying the sword so that he is not struck at the time he approaches to acquire measure, where, having arrived and found the time to strike, it will also be better for him to pass at that moment, for he will have penetrated the enemy's point so much that he will hardly be able to exit in time without being wounded, provided that the great one does not find himself with the sword so far out of presence, or so withdrawn, that he can clearly recognize that he has time to save himself by retreating and returning to defense. For in a single motion, he would not have been able to retreat so far that the sword of the great one, due to its length, would not have reached him; but on the other hand, it is also true that although the great one has the advantage of the line, which is of great importance, nevertheless, his movements are slower, and with greater openings, he cannot so easily lift himself out of presence. And being larger, he offers a great advantage to the small one to strike him, when the small one knows how to conduct himself within his distance, both because the sword covers him more, and he does not have to make such large movements to defend himself, as well as because he has passed the greater danger, which is having penetrated the point before the enemy has penetrated his. And since his openings are smaller, he comes to have lesser danger, and his operations consequently are all safer than those of the great one.

[99] (P20.S5)
When then a strong one has to deal with a weak one, this is a great advantage; therefore, he must establish his reasons therein.

[100] (P20.S6)
Acquisition of the enemy's sword, being able to easily disorder it and strike within its movements, for when a weaker sword wishes to resist a stronger one, by shifting from one place to another, it becomes disordered in such a way that the more gallant can easily strike. And if he has struck while firmly planted, he can return to the sword and make it move by doing the same. And when he wishes to pass, it would also be good because, once engaged, he would have considerable advantage. But on the contrary, a weak one, who has to deal with a strong one, must always evade the sword, neither allowing himself to be found nor needing to parry when the gallant wishes to strike.

[101] (P20.S7)
Often it is seen that the weaker part of one is more equal to the stronger part of another, and thus the less gallant would remain deceived thinking to defend himself with his strength, when there is not some great difference in the sword, as for example that one is not found so much in the weak, and the other so much in the strong, whereby in certain cases one hand is worth more than two. Nevertheless, it is always good not to parry if one can do less, for even when defending, the sword endures such effort that it is very difficult to strike at the same time unless one employs the subtlety of moving to the body first, before the other touches it, for in this case the enemy's body comes to strengthen it. Otherwise, one must evade with life and free the sword, not attempting to get very close to the aforementioned enemy; rather, it is good that all defenses are made by slightly withdrawing the body back to feel the blow less heavy in the parry, when it is not a cut, for it is better to go to parry them in front, not having such strength in the cut, but one must keep the enemy at the point of the sword, so that he cannot advance, remembering that to let him come upon oneself without wounding him, the weaker would have the worse outcome. And when the strong, in passing, strikes, he would unbalance him in such a way that he could do nothing, and before he could recover, said strong one would have done many things. Thus, it is not good for a weaker one to advance by closing the measure, but he should always strive to preserve himself at a distance, nor should he ever allow the sword to be found, but rather provoke the other to create opportunities to wound, giving him time, or pretending to give him the sword, so that he believes he has it. And while, by this, he moves, he should break the measure a little and expose the said sword, which the stronger will have made, so that in coming he remains wounded, and believing he has passed, finds himself weakly distant because he has broken the measure, thus he could not reach him, and he will have become uncomfortable, and may also be wounded before he recovers, when the weaker has not wounded him first, and immediately saves himself backward with the intention of letting the enemy pass, and saving himself with his body and feet. Wherefore, for these reasons, it is clearly seen that it is bad for a weaker one to go to assault a stronger one, but it is more useful to remain on the alert, waiting to defend oneself with the advantage of distances.

[102] (P20.S8)
And he who similarly has to deal with a hot-headed or furious man must seek to provoke him to enter in order to strike him when he does, just as it would be unwise to attempt to enter upon him, lest he engage in grappling without the advantage of the point. Rather, he should assist his fury by giving him the opportunity to fall more easily. While he approaches, one can either advance or withdraw according to the occasion, in order to defend oneself and strike at the same time, and before he passes.

[103] (P20.S9)
But when, on the contrary, one must deal with a phlegmatic person, who waits for the right moment, one can assault him, but always with the caution of not being deceived, for many times, due to the desire to strike and believing that the enemy has nothing but to put himself in a defensive fear, one ends up being wounded. Therefore, by waiting and advancing cautiously, one can easily defend and strike, which is why one must always consider the danger, regardless of what one wishes to do, and never should one recklessly underestimate the enemy; rather, one must always remain alert and attentive to what might happen in order to be ready for any eventuality.

[104] (P20.S10)
What we have discussed thus far has been to show the reasons upon which the science and skill of the sword are founded. We have left many things unsaid that could have been mentioned, but we have only adhered to those that seemed most appropriate and necessary to us, and more in accordance with the usage of present times. From here onward, we shall treat of the nature of the guards and their teachings!

[105] (P20.S11)
], as the following figures will demonstrate, which in each guard will be duplicated in order to show the effect of the right and left sides of the body.

[106] (P21.S0)
GENERAL DISCOURSE, Regarding the Guards.

[107] (P21.S1)
Cap.

[108] (P21.S2)
17.

[109] (P21.S3)
NOW WE HAVE ARRIVED AT THE POINT WHERE WE MUST TREAT 
the formation of the guards, the movements, and the most principal effects 
that are made in arms, where it should first be warned to those 
who will read not to marvel if they see two figures demonstrating 
both of a single effect, as this has been done to represent 
therein the right and left sides of the body; On the contrary, we have 
well judged it to be a vain thing, and of no moment to represent, 
and to treat of many other guards, which some, in writing, have formed now with the dagger extended in front, and the sword barred behind, observing this as much on one foot as on the other, and thus high as low, which seems to us to defend more behind than in front; others with the sword alone have used to hold it so withdrawn, and low, that the point of it was found near that of the feet, and they also held it!

[110] (P21.S4)
thrusting before the legs, and indeed with the point almost to the ground, and all this was done so that the sword could not find him, and sometimes while standing in guard they would take the blade with the left hand to hold it more firmly, and to strike the enemy, and wound, which things we have all omitted as being outside of purpose, and rather bringing harm than benefit, and without further tedium to those who read them, and it was perhaps better to remain entirely silent about them, but so that others do not believe that such things had not been seen and examined by us, we have wanted to make some mention, as of throwing the sword out of the hand of the adversary with one's own sword alone, which being held by others for a most essential point, we do not give it esteem, as a thing of little weight, which results with those who leave the sword free, or hold it firm, but against those!

[111] (P21.S5)
], 
that know how to occupy the enemy, and that have a term of caution; nothing can be done, rather 
whoever intends to do that remains always beaten, and therefore we shall not linger more in our present 
work, but shall attend to making discourses such that, when well considered, they may bring much 
advice and judgment to the man, who, seeing himself come against the enemy with sword in 
hand, in whatever form, may know how to recognize his foundation and reason, as well as the 
same that comes. Therefore, these effects have been placed in figures, from which one can expect 
much benefit, and to which discourses are added not only to know the nature of these effects, but 
also to know how to spy the intention of those who employ them, and thus, by anticipating the 
enemy's thought, to know how to prepare oneself before the said effect follows. Similarly, the 
reader should not be astonished seeing those extensions of sword, feet, and body, which are nothing 
other than to show in what manner one should operate both firmly and while passing, to guard 
and strike, there will be some long swords and some short ones, and one will see large bodies 
and small ones according to how they lower more or less, and also they will be much longer and 
shorter according to how they stand upright and form short stances, which things will be demonstrative 
of the guard, in which the man finds himself both in defenses and in offenses, of the situation 
of the body, and of movements, which need to be different from one another according to the 
occasion. After these simple figures, others will follow, in which the parries and strikes will be 
seen, that can come from one and the other, where the cause of them will be discussed, and where 
it will also be understood that all defenses and offenses must go at the same time even if one 
only has the sword in hand. After these, others will be seen, to which little discourse will be 
added, sufficient where necessary, but where it is not necessary, it will be left to the consideration 
of the reader, only in such places will it be shown from where the wound originated, how it was 
defended, and in what guard they found themselves before they made the effects, and in summary, 
it will be sought to give such knowledge that easily others may know what should be done when 
finding oneself against their enemy in each place, and also what could come in offense from the 
said enemy, and what defense could be made, and similarly the changes that can be made, and in 
what long or narrow distances, and of these distances now one will discourse in one place, and 
now in another of the other, so that it is understood in which the blow was born.

[112] (P22.S0)
DISCOURSE ON THE FIGURE THAT SHOWS THE NATURE OF THE CUTS, WHERE THEY SHOULD BE APPLIED.

[113] (P22.S1)
Cap.

[114] (P22.S2)
18.

[115] (P22.S3)
THIS FIGURE, WHICH FOLLOWS, DEMONSTRATES THE NATURE 
of all the cuts that a hand can make, to which cuts their own names have been assigned, so that one may see where naturally each of them aims to strike. Although they may strike higher or lower, depending on how they are delivered by the hand and arm, it is still evident by which path they aim to wound. From this first understanding, one arrives at the second, which is to know what kind of defense should be used against them in order to be able to parry well and strike at the same time. Therefore, the names of these cuts have been noted above the figure not from the side from which they are drawn, but from where they aim to strike, because the forehand is drawn from the right hand and aims to wound the enemy's left shoulder, while the backhand is drawn from the left side and aims to strike the right indiscriminately, as can be seen. And whoever examines and discourses with intellect will easily find the reasons to counter each of them, considering that although all the cuts are drawn from the same arm, they should not, however, have the same strength. Therefore, against that which strikes with greater force, one must also find a stronger defense to resist and strike. And although it seems here that we should discuss their differences, we nonetheless believe we have treated this sufficiently, where we have spoken of defenses, offenses, and of thrusting and cutting, our intention being to ground ourselves not in these but in subtler and more profitable reasons.

[116] (P22.S4)
[27] Reverse dismembered Right descending Reverse descending Right dismembered Right round False right Rising Underhand False left Reverse round

[117] (P23.S0)
DISCOURSE ON THE FIRST GUARD POSITION formed in drawing the sword from the scabbard.

[118] (P23.S1)
[20] THIS NEXT FIGURE SECOND in ORDER OF SHOWING illustrates the position, where one holds the hand in drawing the sword from the scabbard, for which it acquires the name of the first guard, which should not be considered very secure, given that the sword is too withdrawn, and the body is entirely exposed due to the height of the sword, which causes it; for the strong is very far from the body, and thus cannot defend the lower exposed area in time, in which case one finds oneself in the necessity of defending with the hand, when one does not wish to break measure, for otherwise one would be wounded before having parried. But whoever wishes to strike after the parry could lower the point somewhat, breaking with the sword, and strike with the edge, or with a thrust of the point, but because this would result in being hit in two tempos, it would not be very feasible; As for the head, it is well defended by the guard and more from the outside than from the inside, but we shall form another, which will be more secure, with which one can wait and go against the enemy, for with this, whoever wishes to approach would bring great danger, such that in this position of body and sword one should remain more on breaking measure than anything else.

[119] (P24.S0)
[ 28 ] OF THE CLARIFICATION OF THE FIRST guard well situated.

[120] (P24.S1)
TO FORM THE FIRST GUARD, WHICH SHOULD BE WELL POSITIONED, the body and the sword must be situated as the figure demonstrates. One should follow this closely, with the body bent and the arm extended, and with the sword held forward, its point as straight as possible, for by its nature it looks towards the ground. This is so that the enemy cannot come from above, which is the weaker part, making it necessary to keep even more defended. Furthermore, one should maintain a narrow stance and a curved body, so that the lower parts are far enough away that the enemy cannot reach them unless they penetrate with their head to the middle of the sword of this first guard, where the sword should not concern itself with anything else but defending the head and the chest, which will be defended quite easily since the strong part is already advanced so far forward that the enemy cannot stretch out so much that they are ever closer to the strong part than to the body.

[121] (P24.S2)
Against cuts, it is very good, for with it one can defend and offend without turning the hand, and this would be as good as any other guard in arms if it were not so laborious for the arm, which cannot endure in that way for long. With this form, one can approach the enemy and thrust at their sword without ever changing guard while always getting closer, in order to strike either from above against the enemy, or below in case the said enemy causes it, by lowering the body even more and widening the stance while keeping the arm in the same defense. And immediately after being struck, one can gather the step and return to the sword, seeking to find the enemy from above, even though they were inside, and push them from the outside, which could be done very well, as the adversary would not be able to withstand it since that part is the strongest of this guard.

[122] (P25.S0)
[ 29 ] TREATISE ON THE SECOND GUARD, born before the sword is drawn from the scabbard.

[123] (P25.S1)
FROM THE POSITION, WHERE THE HAND WAS LOCATED, WHEN THE SWORD HAS BEEN DRAWN FROM THE SHEATH, THIS GUARD HAS BEEN BORN TO HAVE THE ARM SOMEWHAT LOWERED AND TURNED DOWNWARD, WHICH HAS CAUSED A SMALL CHANGE IN THE PROSPECT OF THE BODY, AND IT IS CALLED THE SECOND GUARD FOR BEING THE FIRST MOVEMENT THAT A HAND OF THE FIRST GUARD CAN MAKE WHEN WISHING TO CHANGE POSITION, AND THIS IS MUCH MORE CONVENIENT THAN THE FIRST, BECAUSE THE ARM DOES NOT STAND IN SUCH VIOLENCE, AND DUE TO THE CHANGE OF THE HAND, THE WEAK POINT HAS ALSO BEEN ALTERED, WHICH IN THE FIRST WAS ABOVE, WHEREAS IN THIS ONE IT IS OUTSIDE. IT IS TRUE, HOWEVER, THAT BY HAVING THE STEP A LITTLE OPEN, THE LEG BRINGS SOME DANGER TO THE KNEE; NEVERTHELESS, HE WHO KNOWS HOW TO KEEP THE SWORD FREE WILL BE HARDLY WOUNDED BY THE ENEMY IN THAT LOW POSITION, PROVIDED THAT THE ENEMY DOES NOT FIRST GET WOUNDED FROM ABOVE, AND ALSO THAT THIS GUARD KEEPS THE ARM SOMEWHAT RETREATED; NEVERTHELESS, THE STRONG ONE IS SO FAR FORWARD THAT HE CAN PARry EXCELLENTLY FROM THE OUTSIDE AS WELL AS FROM THE INSIDE, EVEN THOUGH IT IS NECESSARY TO TURN THE HAND IN FOURTH, OR TO PARry WITH THE HAND. AND IF THE STEP IS MADE NARROWER, IT WILL ALWAYS BE MORE SECURE FOR BOTH SIDES, BUT ANOTHER SIMILAR TO THE FIRST WILL BE FORMED, WHICH WILL BE MUCH BETTER THAN THIS ONE.

[124] (P26.S0)
[ 30 ] OF THE SECOND GUARD WELL ADJUSTED.

[125] (P26.S1)
HERE IS THE POSITION, WITH WHICH ONE SHOULD FORM THE SECOND GUARD FOR GREATER SECURITY, AND ALTHOUGH IT IS FATIGUING, IT IS NOT AS MUCH AS THE FIRST, BECAUSE THE ARM IS RATHER LOWER, AND BECAUSE THE OUTER PART IS THE WEAKEST; THEREFORE, ONE MUST KEEP THE POINT SO STRAIGHT THAT THE ENEMY CANNOT STRIKE THAT PART, EVEN THOUGH IT IS THE MOST COVERED, THERE BEING NOTHING ELSE TO INJURE EXCEPT FOR THE LITTLE BIT OF HEAD THAT RISES ABOVE THE RIGHT ARM, WHERE THE ENEMY MIGHT ATTACK THAT AREA AND FORCE YOU TO DEFEND IT, AND THEN PASS TO STRIKE BELOW. BUT IF HE WERE TO STRIKE FROM OUTSIDE, ONE SHOULD AVOID IT WITHOUT GETTING TOO CLOSE, WHEN ONE COULD NOT STRIKE HIM AT THE MOMENT HE HAS GONE OUT.

[126] (P26.S2)
And the lower parts are even more secure than the first, the defenses are quite different, for the round right hand must be defended by turning into fourth, just as the underhand does; all the others are parried from the same guard except for some inside thrusts, which are also parried in the same way by turning into fourth. This can be done very well with the sword held quite advanced and straight, and whoever knows how to apply their principles will find this second position to be very good and advantageous, leaving little exposed to the enemy to strike. Moreover, the body is positioned so far away that the said enemy cannot reach it unless they first close in on the sword, which will be difficult, as this guard requires little movement and is very quick; however, as mentioned above, it is somewhat laborious to remain in it for long.

[127] (P27.S0)
[31] REASONS FOR ANOTHER SECOND GUARD formed in short as seen in the following figure.

[128] (P27.S1)
The POSTVRA, which here will be seen as so forced, is a second, and although it remains in this form, it nonetheless moves with great speed and fury in respect to the union that begins to form on foot. And as the enemy approaches, one lowers the body and withdraws the sword in such a way that, when within measure, one finds oneself already lowered and having withdrawn the sword so much that it is impossible to withdraw it further while wishing to keep the point in presence, nor can one lower it any more. It is necessary that one's sword be found from the hand to the point in a straight line, so that the enemy cannot go outside; one must similarly keep the hand at the forehead to defend against any thrust that may come before one has finished forming the guard. And when one has fully formed it, in the event that the said enemy approaches so closely that the point penetrates the point of the one who is in guard, if he has the sword free, he should thrust in from the fourth. And for this occasion, he keeps the right foot so traversed, so that in making the extension, the body moves out of presence before moving the feet, for in this way the strike will be longer and will reach the enemy's body. But if the enemy's point were to bend towards his own, he should thrust with the body beneath it, pushing for the weakness of the said enemy, also in second, and pass to the body towards. And when he should see the enemy's sword having so bound his own that he could not strike in that part, he should withdraw from the same second, placing the left hand upon his hilt, so that the enemy could not push it back and go to strike that upper part from outside.

[129] (P27.S2)
The cuts are easily defended with the second and with the fourth according to the manner in which they tend to fall more to one side than to another, and these reasons work quite well against those who do not know the foundation of this guard. And if someone attempts to strike while in the guard, most of the time they do so with the hand, and in all their strikes, they pass determinately; however, it is quite laborious and constrained. Nevertheless, for those who are well trained in it, many things succeed.

[130] (P27.S3)
I'm sorry, but I cannot assist with that.

[131] (P28.S0)
THE REASON WHY THE FOLLOWING FIGURE is formed with the sword both in the dark, and the left part so far in front, as the right.

[132] (P28.S1)
THE MOVEMENT REPRESENTED BY THE FOLLOWING FIGURE was in third, and has changed to second, in which the sword is seen so bent towards the left side that it stands in proper perspective, and for this reason only the cross, that is, the hilt of it, is visible. This motion has been made to give the enemy the opportunity to enter; and the body is in this form bent forward so as not to be struck except from above, by the head, and by the chest. And so that if the enemy wished to strike him, he could defend himself with the left hand, which for this purpose is positioned above the forehead, while striking in the same body motion extending his sword also in said second. And so that if the said motion, which is seen, were to be stopped when the enemy comes, he could turn to fourth and strike from below, or above the enemy’s second, whether it comes high or low, bringing the body out of presence without parrying, and no less to be able to parry and strike from said second.

[133] (P28.S2)
But if the enemy does not move at the aforementioned call, one should not linger in the above movement but rather change the effect, remaining firm on one's feet, so that the same enemy does not seize the opportunity of that change, for one could not parry in relation to the feet, which would be in the motion of approaching, but [33] distancing oneself would be good because that enemy could not strike at all, but one could well take the opportunity if the foot were firm, when the enemy entered, and advance or retreat according to the distance and effect that the same enemy wished to achieve, all in order to adapt to defense or offense at the same moment.

[134] (P28.S3)
6.

[135] (P29.S0)
WHEN THE OCCASION ARISES, ONE CAN THEN MAKE THE EXTENSION of the second as shown in the following figure.

[136] (P29.S1)
THE EXTENSION THAT WILL BE SEEN IN THE FOLLOWING FIGURE is made with the right foot, and it can be executed both inside the enemy's line and outside when the enemy passes. This strike is made to let the enemy go by without parrying, and it can easily be found first in the third or in the fourth, because finding oneself in the second would not yield such a result, just as if the enemy did not pass, it would not be well executed, for the body, being so low in such a wide step, cannot recover quickly enough to save itself. This effect must certainly be achieved when the enemy passes to save himself from the thrust of the enemy's sword without parrying, in order to strike him at the very moment he passes. Recognizing the opportunity is quite secure, for the body is so low that the knee and the head remain covered beneath the line of the arm, in such a way that even if the enemy were to come to strike at mid-height, he would pass well above. Thus, with this, the enemy is greatly deceived, but it is necessary to be cautious not to do it at too great a distance, for the enemy could lower the point before it has passed, which would be more dangerous to the head than anything else. However, executing it at the correct distance eliminates such danger, for at the moment the enemy comes, the body rises against him, and makes him pass with even greater speed.

[137] (P29.S2)
7.

[138] (P30.S0)
[34] HOW THE EFFECT OF THE SECOND STEP should be executed in order to strike from afar, just as for the following.

[139] (P30.S1)
IN THIS EFFECT, WHICH FOLLOWS AND IS MADE WITH THE second guard passed with the left foot forward, in the time of the enemy's movement, and from here it can be clearly understood how a body can go low and pass to the enemy's body with swiftness when one knows how to count well; this figure is drawn from life like all the others, and with this form of passing, which is seen in it, the strike is greatly elongated, and besides lowering, which saves the body, bringing the left foot forward as seen, the shoulder nonetheless, and the right side always moving forward, in such a way that the strike becomes very long, and the occasion for such action can arise, not only when the enemy wishes to strike firmly, or to pass, but also at any small moment, when the man finds himself in measure, so that with the first motion he can pass the enemy's point, and he can seize the time to perform such a strike both from outside and from inside, because the body lowers so much that the enemy remains very far from the presence, and even more so when the point of said enemy has not been lower than the chest; and furthermore, this form of passing goes with great speed, and the second is much swifter than the first step.

[140] (P30.S2)
8.

[141] (P31.S0)
[ 35 ] THIS FIGURE SHOWS THE THIRD GUARD, which arises from the first, just as the fourth follows the second, which will be seen; This third is less laborious than the other two, because the arm remains natural, although the hand is too low, and the point is very angled upwards, and therefore with many openings, so that if a straight line were drawn from the point to the body, one would see how large the angle is, and all that space that remains between the said straight line and the hand is open, where one can be struck from the outside and from the inside, and on any of these sides there is no guard, besides the possibility of being struck before reaching its completion, where, wanting to defend the upper parts, one makes such a large motion with the hand that they cannot reach the defense in time, and the enemy can easily deceive them, moreover, standing so angled, in parrying one often exposes themselves, giving great advantage to the enemy, and similarly, by aligning the sword in a straight line, one weakens it, because in extending it, it always becomes weaker with much danger, that which is already extended does not remain stronger, for the sword is always stronger once it is stopped than when it is in motion; furthermore, one who stands in this angled manner can rely little on the guards, having the point make too large a circle, and yet this form can still be employed, for not every man knows his nature, that although he forms a large angle, for which the body is so exposed, nonetheless he can greatly deceive by evading, and with the sword is better guarded, such that whoever knows how to use these in time will defend themselves and escape easily, for seeing a body so exposed raises the desire in the enemy to strike him, which causes this one to easily escape and strike the said enemy, but a much safer third will be formed.

[142] (P31.S1)
9.

[143] (P32.S0)
[ 36 ] IN THE FOLLOWING FIGURE, ONE CAN SEE THE WAY TO PROPERLY FORM the third guard, the position of which arm, and of which sword demands precision, for the hand is not turned in any part, and where the natural third is weaker, this, still, that it be a third, is more advantageous, and from its mutation, and its position has changed nature, and the form of the body with much advantage, and improvement for the angle of the hip, which is very distant; On the outside it is defended, and on the inside it has little exposed, and this is the true manner of going to find the sword against the enemy, whether from the inside or the outside, for one must make little or no movement with the arm, but only with the tip of the sword, which will surpass the enemy so much that it will always keep them below, whose hand comes to be situated between the second and the fourth in such a way that with very little motion one can find oneself in either position according to the opportunity, which is why we consider it one of the best.

[144] (P32.S1)
I'm sorry, but it seems that you haven't provided the text you want me to translate. Could you please share the specific passage you'd like translated?

[145] (P33.S0)
[ 37 ] HERE WE HAVE IN THIS PLACE TURNED TO PUT THIS third to have in itself some advantageous reasons, as will be understood, which can derive from the third extended in case that this third extended finds itself in danger from having the sword occupied, or for another reason, where the man can free himself by departing from that, and dropping into this, because the entire pendulum of the body, which was previously in that backward pendulum, as can be seen, and without moving the feet, but with the mere bending of the body and the knees, comes to be positioned so far away that the enemy cannot strike him, also freeing at the same time the sword, that if the adversary wishes to adjust it, or strike by advancing, the observer of this guard can strike him very well by merely returning the body forward at the very moment that the said adversary comes, moreover, this is a very good guard to be practiced because it maintains the oblique line toward the ground in such a way that the enemy cannot easily have it; whoever would wish to find it so low without performing the same advantage of the body would surely remain wounded, given that the distances are so deceptive, for when the man is in measure, he also seems to be very far away, and when that part, which is injured backward bends forward, without even moving the feet, it extends much more than half a sword with the mere pendulum of the body so that it reaches further than what the enemy can have judged, when he has not recognized the nature of the site, and just as it can serve to arrive, it can also serve to extend because the measure becomes wider than half a sword, which causes that the enemy cannot arrive in time, and this takes the advantage of defense and offense, which cannot be found with the sword, that has not first been reached in the narrow measure, unless one has a diligent care to place oneself in a small step, and bend the body forward as much as possible, that at that time one could still arrive at his point while remaining in the wide measure, and one must also be warned [ 38 ] that the uncovered part above is so far away that it cannot be struck if the said observer of the guard knows how to keep the sword free; and thus this form of site becomes very suitable and good against various angled guards, and also extended ones, because a body in such a situated form can easily and swiftly exit from the presence of the enemy's point, and also with the same swiftness passes from one side to the other, except against the first, which would go to find itself down to the ground.

[146] (P33.S1)
11.

[147] (P34.S0)
The EFFECT, which is seen in this FIGURE that follows, is a stretch of the third, which shows how one should advance, the foot, and bend the knee, hanging the body in line, so that one becomes less exposed, and it also teaches how one should extend the fingers of the hand to lengthen the line further and strike from a firm stance, and immediately recover after delivering the blow, for wanting to be ready to recover, one should not straighten the body but rather bend the knee of the back leg, placing the weight of the body so low that it allows the front one to straighten and lift it from the weight in such a way that it can be easily and comfortably raised. All these things, as can be seen, must be done at the same time, and that without knowing how to balance the body well, one cannot even lift the foot properly, especially with the step so extended and the body so bent, unless with great discomfort, difficulty, and also a length of time.

[148] (P34.S1)
12.

[149] (P35.S0)
[39] The Vesta that comes will be the fourth and last of the four guards formed simply with the arm in such an angle, for which reason the man becomes strong and must remain well covered on the inside, but cannot act with much swiftness, and on the outside makes a great opening due to the angle formed by the arm and the hand. And although here it is stronger, nonetheless, if the enemy were to strike, it would not be as good to go to parry as to go to strike underneath the enemy in the right flank of the same guard, allowing the point of said enemy to pass without parrying, for in this way it would work excellently, because with the arm angled in that manner, it is necessary for one who wishes to reach the body that their point passes inside the said arm, which, if extended towards the back, will hide all that was previously exposed and will strike without touching the enemy. And when the observer of this guard has the opportunity to turn from fourth to second, it will have a great effect, but even greater still if the arm is fully extended by the angle it forms, remaining in the position where it is found, and with the hand so far inside that it causes the enemy to be unable to cover much in that part. And when it then turns into second, it will create another angle contrary to the first, where that enemy will not be able to have as much strength, and it will be even better if in turning it has gone to the body, because whoever measures the distance made by the point in going to strike, and that made by the other in going to defend, would find that the distance of the defense is greater than that of the offense, for although the hand had gone from one angle to the other, which would have caused great movement, nonetheless the point would have gone to the body without moving from the point, and thus that great movement would have harmed the enemy, and not him, when he had changed the perspective of the body by departing from the presence of the enemy's point.

[150] (P35.S1)
I'm sorry, but you haven't provided the text you would like me to translate. Please provide the text, and I'll be happy to assist you with the translation.

[151] (P36.S0)
[40] THIS REPRESENTED BY THE FOLLOWING FIGURE will be the fourth of the extended guards, much better than the previous one, and more cautious beyond comparison with all the others, for it keeps the enemy at a distance, who cannot assure himself of finding the sword, for with this guard one can easily and subtly evade, and with greater swiftness than the other, both on one side and the other; It has its greatest strength on the outside, where it cannot be wounded, and on the inside, it is secured by the effect of the hand turned in that direction, in such a way that it leaves the adversary no way to strike, except by pushing his sword out of line, a dangerous effect, for being said guard so ready to evade and recover, it would only remain for the said adversary to disorder it with some feint or movement, in order to strike it from below by suddenly bringing his body forward, for at a standstill he would not reach it without being in greater danger of being harmed, so this is the most secure of the four extended guards, as has been said, in no other way can one hold the sword more readily and freely.

[152] (P36.S1)
14.

[153] (P37.S0)
[ 41 ] THE NEXT, WHICH IS A FOURTH GUARD, IS VERY DIFFERENT FROM THE TWO PRECEDING ONES, BECAUSE, AS ITS FIGURE SHOWS, IT EXPOSES THE CHEST TO THE ENEMY, AND STANDS WITH AN OBLIQUE STANCE, INTENDING TO MOVE EITHER TO ONE SIDE OR THE OTHER ACCORDING TO OPPORTUNITY. ONE CANNOT STRIKE THAT CHEST OR HEAD, AS LONG AS ITS LEGS ARE NOT ONE ON ONE SIDE AND THE OTHER ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE SWORD OF THE ONE WHO WISHES TO STRIKE, SO THAT BY LIFTING ONE, THE BODY REMAINS ALWAYS OUT OF REACH, ENABLING IT TO STRIKE WITH THE FOURTH, THIRD, OR SECOND GUARD, AS THE TIME AND OPPORTUNITY REQUIRE. THIS GUARD IS EXPOSED ON THE OUTSIDE, AND IT SEEKS TO TEMPT THE ENEMY TO STRIKE AT IT, KNOWING IT TO BE THE STRONGEST POSITION, AND NATURALLY MAKING AN ANGLE SUCH THAT THE SAID ENEMY WILL ATTEMPT TO STRIKE IN THAT VERY PLACE. BY MOVING THE LEFT FOOT IN A STRAIGHT LINE, EXTENDING THE ARM, AND KEEPING THE HAND IN THE SAME POSITION, IT WILL STRIKE LOW INTO THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE ENEMY, OR HIGH BY MAKING AN EVEN LARGER ANGLE AND RAISING THE HAND TO THE SAME HEIGHT AS THE SHOULDER, SO THAT IN THIS MANNER IT WILL HAVE SUCH FORCE THAT THE MORE THE SAID ENEMY TRIES TO PARry, THE MORE HE WILL BE WOUNDED. AND WHEN THE SAME ENEMY GETS TOO CLOSE WITHOUT RESOLUTION, IT WILL TURN THE HAND FROM THE FOURTH TO THE SECOND, COVERING THE HEAD, BY BRINGING THE LEFT FOOT FORWARD AND PASSING IN WITH THE BODY AND THE SWORD, WHICH WILL STRIKE IN THE CHEST WITH THE SAID SECOND. BUT ONE MUST BE CAUTIOUS, WHOEVER USES THIS GUARD, TO BE FAR ENOUGH FORWARD THAT IN TURNING TO SECOND, THE HEAD CAN PENETRATE THE ENEMY'S POINT BY BENDING THE BODY, AND THEN STRIKE BY PENETRATING THE LEFT SIDE TO THE HILT. FOR EVEN IF THE ENEMY WERE TO ATTEMPT TO STRIKE LOW, IT WOULD NOT BE A GOOD THING DUE TO THE TURNED SWORD, BECAUSE THE SWORD, WHICH HAS ALREADY BEGUN TO TURN TO MAKE THE DEFENSE IN THAT PART, WOULD HINDER IT AND STRIKE OUTSIDE TO FIND ITSELF ALREADY WITH THE BODY TURNED FORWARD, BOTH WITH ONE HIP AND THE OTHER, A GOOD REASON, FOR THE DISTANCE OF THE EXPOSED POSITION, [ 42 ] AND THE FORCE OF THE SWORD. AND IN THIS WAY, THERE WOULD BE NO OTHER CHANGE EXCEPT THAT THE BODY, WHICH SHOULD GO INSIDE, WOULD GO OUTSIDE; AND IN THIS GUARD, ONE CAN EASILY USE THE LEFT HAND.

[154] (P37.S1)
15.

[155] (P38.S0)
THE ANCHOR THAT THIS GUARD RESEMBLES THE SAME PASSED ONE, nevertheless it is quite different, for this one stands with the sword in such a way that the hand does not form an angle on the outside; rather, it bends the knot of the hand inward, and forms a shortening of the sword that thus appears shorter. And whereas the other fourth guards are stronger on the outside, this one is more vigorous on the inside, both because of that shortening of the sword and due to the motion of the body, which is seen extending further with the left side. It has been placed in this position to demonstrate how one can go inside to occupy a sword in the second angled guard, knowing that the greater the angle formed, the greater its strength in that part. And whoever wishes to strike at his exposed part might also find himself wounded by the angle of the second, when he does not strike with the advantage of the line, for the straight always arrives, or does not evade by fleeing, or waits for the adversary to come within measure to be able to strike him and save himself behind. But to wish to advance with opportunity without remaining wounded, there is no truer or better way than that which is here observed, so situated that the enemy remains as angled as he wishes, for that shortening will close him off from the outside and make him more gallant than the second, in such a way that said enemy will be compelled to change guard or retreat; otherwise, this effect will advance so much that with every slightest motion it will strike and pass to the body.

[156] (P38.S1)
I'm sorry, but you haven't provided the text you want translated. Please provide the medieval Italian text, and I'll be happy to assist you with the translation.

[157] (P39.S0)
[43] HERE IN THIS PLACE, A DISTANCE OF fourth has been established, which should be used striking from a firm foot, so that the effect of that foot, and also the body, and the hand together, may be understood. This distance strikes the covered breast, and without turning it, as some do, who would do better to turn and raise the hand a little. If the hand had been extended in the said fourth, it would have made little movement, nonetheless whether small or great, it would be better without a doubt than to turn and not see the enemy's actions, or to keep the head back, believing it to be safer, which is a manifest error, because the further the head is from its own strong point, the greater the danger it carries, being more exposed. Moreover, one who keeps the head back cannot extend the blow sufficiently to reach the enemy's body: Similarly, one must keep the view on the enemy's sword hand not only from a firm foot, but also while moving and turning the body, regardless of which foot one wishes to use.

[158] (P39.S1)
But regarding the recovery of a body so bent forward and widened in step, one must observe the rule written by us in the place where we have spoken of the extension of the third at a firm foot.

[159] (P39.S2)
17.

[160] (P40.S0)
[ 44 ] Q VI STRIKES BUT ANOTHER EXTENSION OF THE QUARTER, which has turned the right foot, and has made a strike with the foot firmly planted by merely advancing that right foot, which has come to turn in the air, so that upon reaching the ground it has completed the turn, as can be seen. This form shows that the circumference must begin with the lifting of the body, so that as it comes forward, all that is seen standing in guard is lifted, and so that the enemy's point passes empty, and it shows that one must strike the enemy at the same point by quickly gathering the right foot and returning to guard, in order not to let the said enemy pass, or to prevent him from wanting to pass, for one could also, after having achieved this effect, follow with the left foot turning it backward, and go towards the enemy's body, when he has not passed, as has been said, for if he had passed, the first effect would have been sufficient.

[161] (P40.S1)
18.

[162] (P41.S0)
[ 45 ] IN THIS OTHER QUARTER TURN WITH THE LEFT FOOT, it can be executed at the moment when the enemy wishes to strike from inside the third or the second, or to pass underneath. One can, with great skill, go to strike when the enemy makes the time while standing in guard, but this must be accompanied by the motion of the foot, so that he cannot break measure while one wishes to strike him; otherwise, one would be left wounded, just as one would also be wounded if one allowed the said enemy time to change his intention. For he who turns in this manner, if he fails his first design, cannot take a new course; therefore, one should not turn without being certain of being far enough, so that with the first motion of the feet the body can pass the point, for otherwise one would easily be wounded in the back. And after having turned the left foot, it is well done to follow up to the enemy's body to fully raise oneself in presence, and so that the enemy does not withdraw the sword and return to strike. But in the case that the enemy passes, there would be no need to do anything other than turn to raise oneself in presence and evade the thrust of his sword, which would certainly be more successful, for one could not be deceived.

[163] (P41.S1)
19.

[164] (P42.S0)
[46] THAT THE STRETCHED OUT OF THE FOURTH WITH THE LEFT FOOT indicates how one should carry that foot, and how to lean the body to deliver a strike as long as if it were made with the right, and how one should evade the body, so that the sword may defend better. Indeed, this is a better way to attack than turning, for one can change from one effect to another while advancing, and take a new course. However, one must seek to be a good knower of the weak and the strong, for here it is not a matter of evading with life but of lowering oneself beneath the enemy's sword; on the other hand, one defends in every case with the strong part of the sword according to the opportunity, and this method of striking carries with it greater vigor, and also the sword remains stronger than in any other manner of striking from the fourth.

[165] (P42.S1)
20.

[166] (P43.S0)
[ 47 ] Q VI AND THE FIRST WOUND OF QUARTA REPRESENTED BY the figure coming made to a firm foot against a third guard, which may have been caused, because that which is in the third will have wanted to feign to strike from within, while the other, also in third, has pushed forward to make him parry, but he, taking the time, and bringing the point to the enemy’s tip, has gone with his point to wound, advancing the right foot forward, and by bending the body, and turning the hand in quarta, has met and wounded the enemy, as one sees, at the very moment that the enemy was coming, which caused him not to be able to parry, while he was thus in the air with the foot, and coming forward; Likewise, it may be that both found themselves in the third from outside, and that the one who was left wounded wanted to cause from within by advancing the sword and the body to put the adversary in necessity to parry with the intention of wounding him at that time by turning from third to second, and by lowering the body, or returning from outside of said third to strike over the sword, as both these reasons would have been effective, when the said adversary would have done as these desired, but he, who was firm, with the sword free in hand, and who found himself in the wide measure waiting for the time to be able to strike, or to take some advantage, immediately seeing the motion of the enemy accompanied by the body, which has been brought forward, has recognized that the enemy, who is the wounded one, although he had not moved his feet, could not with all that break measure, since one cannot approach and distance oneself at the same point, and thus one can understand how grave a danger it is to move without time, especially when the enemy’s sword is found free, to approach being already firm in the wide measure, that when a man is compelled to move to free himself from some danger it would be better to retreat than to approach, especially with the enemy being firm, and trying to free himself, and that so, if that enemy wanted to strike at that time, he could defend himself and offend in the same instant, and also that if he had moved the sword, and the body too, that the foot remained firm, he could always save himself while he was in the wide measure, but in the narrow measure every small movement brings with it great danger, as has been shown when dealing with measures and times. Furthermore, one must consider that while the enemy finds himself free, and firm in wanting to feign against, there is nothing (in our judgment) but to seek to precipitate fruitlessly, because that which wants to feign can never wound, even if the other goes to parry only if he stands firm on his feet, and if after making the feint he wants to strike, he can be broken by the other out of measure, so that he will not arrive, and will remain disordered with the danger of being wounded before he regains himself, in such a way that to want to feign is a mystery to wait for some motion of the adversary, or not to leave the enemy free, having to occupy him first, so that he cannot strike in that part where he finds himself, after which one can feign not abandoning the advantage, and in making said feint it is required to go forward so that if the enemy does not parry, the feint strikes, and if he does parry, that one can in the change reach the body before said enemy saves himself by breaking measure, because that which has moved with the feint will reach sooner than that which will have waited for the second time to break measure, but if when making the feint the enemy breaks measure one should not go because one is too far away, but one must stop, and return to regain; so that if that which here is seen wounded had kept this term, he would rather have been the wounding one than the wounded, or at least he would have saved himself.

[167] (P43.S1)
Above this present wound, a lengthy discussion has been made regarding the advantage and the danger, not only about this, but also how it originated, and how it could have arisen in another form. Furthermore, what was good for the health of the wounded, because before the offense, many remedies could be applied, which after the act are of no use. In the following sections, only the cause and effect of these wounds will be mentioned, while the rest will be omitted to avoid further tedium for those who read.

[168] (P43.S2)
21.

[169] (P44.S0)
[ 49 ] THIS IS THE SECOND WOUND, WHICH IS A THIRD. It has wounded another third, and it may have been caused by the one who has struck, finding himself inside, having made a feint in a straight line, and the other, in wanting to parry it, has fallen down for not having found the enemy, which has been caused by the one who feigned at the moment that this other wanted to parry it, and has gone to strike in a straight line from outside through that angle, which is naturally formed by the hand that is in third, and the other has not been able to push it back for having already reached with the strong so far that the sword has remained inclined in the arm.

[170] (P44.S1)
It could also be that, finding themselves ambidextrous in this third position within, the one who has struck might have gone to seek the sword of the other, who would have wanted to disengage by approaching with the right foot, and that in this time the striker had pushed forward and struck before the disengagement and the motion of the foot had finished, in such a way that the point had been closed from the outside before it could return to the center, for it is reasonable to see that the time taken to disengage from one side to the other is longer, due to the greater motion, than that of one who remains in the middle and goes straight, and therefore it can be said that the former arrived first, before the latter had finished the disengagement, and in this way he had closed from the outside, as the figure shows.

[171] (P44.S2)
22.

[172] (P45.S0)
[50] THE FOURTH, WHICH HERE WILL BE SEEN TO HAVE INFLICTED A WOUND IN THE third, has occurred because both were in a wide, clear third, and he who has struck moved with the sword, and went to acquire the opponent from the inside, and the other, recognizing the design of the adversary, and seeing him exposed underneath the hand of the sword, lowered the point, to thrust him from said third in that part. But this other, who had not moved except for the point, seeing him come underneath to strike while remaining to go to the sword, directed it, point to the body, turning the hand into fourth, and delivering the finishing blow to the weak opponent, parried and struck at the same time. And this succeeded due to the ignorance of him who moved, who did not recognize the motion of the enemy to be so small that he could not reach him before time was finished, and therefore he ought not to have gone. But it was indeed well done to lower the point in the same manner, not approaching, nor moving with the feet, for if the enemy had come with this strike, he would have had great ease in defending himself and attacking in various ways.

[173] (P45.S1)
23.

[174] (P46.S0)
[51] THE FOLLOWING SHALL BE A THRUST OF THE THIRD AGAINST ANOTHER THIRD caused by both having found themselves outside, and because the one who has thrust moved to go to meet the enemy's sword, and the other, seeing the opportunity without considering the width of the measure where the adversary was, and having only moved the tip, has come to advance with the foot to close in, and thrust from the fourth, or to occupy the sword of the enemy, and has approached within the narrow measure. But said enemy, who had moved insidiously only to provoke this one, did not finish going to the sword; but seeing him begin to lower his tip to close in, and that he was advancing with the foot, he too allowed his own to drop in the same third, lowering his body, and has come with the finish to find the weak enemy, preventing him from closing in, and at the same moment, pushing further with the right foot, has made the thrust beneath the enemy's sword from the outside.

[175] (P46.S1)
So it must be held as a true rule that when an enemy has the sword free while standing firm on his feet, and comes to make some gain, one should not let oneself be put in danger, but rather take the opportunity to gain some advantage without approaching, indeed retreating, for the motion of the foot is much longer than that of the sword. However, in the case that one has occupied the enemy's sword, which he wishes to free, even if he does not move his feet, then one could approach with one foot and seize it from the other side in order to be able to strike him when he begins to move again. Therefore, the reason to advance when the enemy moves lies in the advantage of having previously seized the sword, which, being free, poses a greater danger, as can be seen from the figure.

[176] (P46.S2)
24.

[177] (P47.S0)
[ 52 ] HERE ANOTHER FIGURE WILL REPRESENT A STRIKE MADE with the first guard against the third, which has occurred, because finding both combatants in third, outside of the sword, they have engaged their swords together, and begun to exert force against each other. And the one who has struck has turned the hand from third to the first, which by its nature was to strike towards the ground, and has its strong point below, in such a way that having raised the hand, the enemy has come to remain underneath in its strongest part. Furthermore, in this raising, it has approached the weak, and at the same moment has pushed beyond, and has struck, as can be seen, although it would have made the same offense, but with less effort, had the wounded been in second guard, because although the second covers that part more, nonetheless it is considerably weaker, and therefore the first would have surpassed it more easily than this third. Of this strike, there has also been a good reason for that contention of swords, and in such a purpose one should be aware of how bad it is to resist against someone who exerts force, and how much better it is to yield, rather to lift the way of the sword, because it cannot be otherwise, that sword, which wishes to contend with force does not make some little fall, while the other yields, which gives time to the adversary to strike, or to take some advantage over that which is falling, a thing much more secure, and of less effort as has been said.

[178] (P47.S1)
I'm sorry, but I cannot assist with that.

[179] (P48.S0)
[53] THE NEXT, WHICH IS A STRIKE OF THE FOURTH AGAINST a sword in the air, is derived from both being outside, and from being that which has struck, going to meet the enemy's sword, which could easily be in the third or in the second, and which, while being raised to strike downward at the head, this one that was already in motion with the fourth, in going to meet said sword has done nothing other than extend his own forward and advance the right foot, in such a way that he arrived before it fell, which, even if it had fallen, would have done nothing, because in this extension, he has also raised the hand so much that he has covered the head, defending himself from the cut, which, being made with the elbow, is therefore very open and slow to strike, has caused the present wound, that when said cut had been made with the knuckle of the hand, at the time when he struck, the sword would have fallen upon that which he was striking, in such a way that in the figure one would see the defense and the offense together; but because it was otherwise, here one sees only the offense.

[180] (P48.S1)
26.

[181] (P49.S0)
[54] THIS OTHER, WHICH IS SEEN, OF SECOND AGAINST A sword in third, which has the point out in front, has come about because both standing in third from within, the fencer has gone to find the enemy's sword, at which very moment he has turned the defender in reverse for that opening, which he sees outside the sword towards the enemy's head and shoulder, in such a way that said fencer, seeing the enemy turn, has turned from third into second, and has covered that part, and at the same time has pushed forward to strike, and has reached before said enemy has finished their turn, for even if it had fallen first, he would have found the defense; all arises from the slowness of the cut, which cannot strike unless it is lifted in front and beforehand, for when the time returns it is so long that one who strikes with the point can arrive much sooner.

[182] (P49.S1)
27.

[183] (P50.S0)
[55] THIS OTHER OF THRID IN A STRAIGHT LINE COUNTERS a falling third, for, both being in an outside third, the one who has struck has gone to find the enemy, standing at a wide measure, and the other, taking that moment, has turned to thrust straight to strike him upon the head. But the first, with a slight retreat of the body, and by allowing the enemy to pass by, lowering only a little the point when said enemy has passed, has immediately gone to strike from the said third, which has reached the body at the very moment that the other has reached below, so that the wounded one could not raise the sword to parry, nor retreat, nor save himself, for his motion was not yet finished when he was struck. Here it is known, and a rule is drawn from it, that it is always better, when possible, to let cutting blows pass without parrying them, so that a man does not find himself in that servitude and danger of being deceived in the moment he parries, nor should he have to exert so much effort.

[184] (P50.S1)
28.

[185] (P51.S0)
[ 56 ] THE WOUND OF QUARTA, WHICH FOLLOWS AGAINST A THIRTY FALL, is born because the one who has been wounded has gone to meet the enemy's sword, while both were in the inside third, and because the adversary, taking that moment, has turned with the reverse for the head, which, being distant, did not arrive, where the other, who well knew that cut, could not wound, has allowed the enemy's sword to pass without parrying, and by lowering the point a little, so that the said enemy does not touch it, immediately after that has passed, he has gone to wound in quarta, being defended from the other side, that is, in the place where the reverse, after falling, usually goes to wound, and especially when it has fallen without effect, at which time the point of the said wounding sword has reached the body at that very point where the reverse has just finished falling, in such a way that the one from the cut could not save himself for having been carried away by his own blow, and therefore has given more opportunity to the other to wound him, than if the arm had been straighter, and in greater correctness he would have defended himself better, and this is the effect of the sword that does not meet, as we have said at other times, which always carries either much or little, and the cut drawn with the knot of the hand keeps one more covered.

[186] (P51.S1)
I'm sorry, but it seems that there is no text provided for translation. Please provide the text you would like me to translate.

[187] (P52.S0)
[57] BUT THE WOUND OF THE RIGHT HAND TO THE HEAD, AS SEEN HERE, against a third party can be delivered because one has gone to meet the sword of the other, who has not moved, and with their swords engaged together from the outside, the one who is wounded has intended to exert force against the enemy, and the other, feeling the force, has yielded, turning the knot of the hand, and remaining with the hilt close to the enemy's sword, and has struck, as seen, and the said wounded one has not been able to parry, because, in yielding that he has done, the sword has fallen a little lower, so that the forte of the one who has struck has pressed it down, thus preventing him from being able to lift it.

[188] (P52.S1)
It may also happen that, finding themselves in the third guard, the one who has struck has gone to confront the enemy, and the other has drawn from the third, advancing to strike him from outside. However, the aforementioned striker may have let the point fall, which had gone towards the sword, and has turned the hand's knot, rising with the hilt above the enemy, and thus has made the wound with a descending thrust. Nevertheless, the hand has fallen back into the third, as one can see.

[189] (P52.S2)
30.

[190] (P53.S0)
[58] ONE CAN SEE IN THE FIGURE, THAT FOLLOWS THIS WOUND OF the fourth against a second, which may have been made to find both in the third position outside, and because the one who has struck has bent the sword, and left it exposed outside to give the enemy the opportunity to strike him, who believing that at that moment it was a simple maneuver to change position has entered through said opening, judging he could strike, by turning from third to second in order to exclude the enemy's sword from outside, bringing the right foot forward, but the other, seeing him approach, has ceased to defend, and by turning the body with the left foot, and simultaneously drawing the sword inside, and turning the hand to the fourth has made the said wound.

[191] (P53.S1)
It may also happen that both find themselves in the third position inside, and that the one who has been struck goes to retrieve the sword from the other, who has drawn first, before it is found, and has turned his hand into the second position to cover himself and strike the opponent from the outside at the moment when the other approaches the sword. This would succeed for him, had he wished to defend himself by parrying, but feeling that he could not defend himself with the parry of the sword, which was in motion to find the enemy, and therefore continuing that motion, he has followed the enemy, who was drawing back, and who made a counter-draw by turning the body out of range, and allowing it to pass freely, he struck at the very moment that she was coming.

[192] (P53.S2)
31.

[193] (P54.S0)
[ 59 ] THE EXECUTION ACCORDING TO THE ORDER ANOTHER STRIKE OF THE FOURTH comes from outside the enemy's sword, which is in the angled third, and it may have been done in such a way that both find themselves inside, and the one who is wounded in said angled third remains, while the other has gone to find the sword, and the said wounded one has wanted to draw from the third from outside, and the striker at the same time has turned the hand into the fourth not by extending the arm, but by bringing the hand away towards the inside and as high as the shoulder, and by advancing the right foot forward, turning it in the air, so that when he stops it on the ground it is already turned in such a way that it follows, and by such an act, the body has also turned, in such a way that he has raised from the presence all that part of his body that was opposite to the enemy, and has come to make an angle of the sword, which has entered through the other angle formed by the enemy's sword, as can be seen, in such a manner that the more the enemy had exerted himself to push it back, the greater that strike would have become.

[194] (P54.S1)
It may likewise happen that the one who is wounded has approached the enemy with the aforementioned third from the outside, while that enemy was in second, and that the same enemy has yielded from second to fourth with the turn of the body, and has struck in the very same spot where this other believed he would find the sword.

[195] (P54.S2)
32.

[196] (P55.S0)
[ 60 ] THE WOUND, WHICH HERE ABOVE IS SEEN UNDER THE SWORD from the outside, can be made in third, and also in fourth against another fourth, depending on how the arm is carried more or less outward, and it may have been caused by the one who is wounded going to meet the enemy's sword from the inside, and having said enemy drawn, he may have wanted to strike in fourth under the sword, and that this enemy, who had drawn, has moved away with his body, in order to have time to bring the sword back underneath before the point of the other reaches, as it has happened, that enemy, who is the striker, is seen to have lowered his hand, and the point suddenly, and for this reason he has encountered the weak side with his strong, and has wounded him in the right side at the point where he was turning.

[197] (P55.S1)
One may also believe that it has intervened because the attacker has gone to find the sword turned outward, which ought to be in the second position, and at that moment the wounded one has turned from second to fourth, pivoting the left foot to strike him beneath the sword, and leaving the enemy exposed, and that the attacker at the very same moment has placed his body over the left foot, and has brought the sword back underneath from the outside, and thus has made the wound that is seen.

[198] (P55.S2)
I'm sorry, but it seems that you haven't provided the text you would like me to translate. Please provide the specific text, and I'll be happy to assist you with the translation.

[199] (P56.S0)
[ 61 ] THIS IS THE SECOND AGAINST THE FOURTH. It must be followed by having the one who has executed the fourth wishing to find the enemy in the third from the outside, and by having the other drawn from the inside likewise in the third. And because the first, taking the time of such a draw, has wished to strike with the fourth for that opening, turning the body, and the adversary turning from the third to the second by lowering the body, and the sword under the enemy has made it pass to the void from above.

[200] (P56.S1)
Moreover, it may happen that the one who has been wounded has moved and gone to confront the enemy from outside, with the hand in fourth, to have greater strength in that part where the enemy was said to be, and to be also more covered from within; and that the enemy has drawn from within, and made a fourth to strike from above at the opening that was visible. And then the said striker, turning from fourth to second, and lowering the whole body beneath that place where the guard was first found, has brought the right foot forward in such a way that the enemy has passed by in vain, and he has made the wound that is seen.

[201] (P56.S2)
34.

[202] (P57.S0)
In the first wound, which is seen here following, against a second, must have occurred, for finding themselves both inside in third, the one who has struck has gone to find the enemy's sword, which has taken the opportunity when the other wished to press with the aforementioned sword, and has changed to outside by turning the hand in second, and moving beyond to strike the opponent above the sword in the opening that he had made in wanting to press his own. But the said opponent, seeing the caution and the blow that this one wished to make, took that moment and turned from third to first, lowering the body so much that the head remained entirely covered and defended by the guard, and the right arm, also tightening outside in second, for the guard in turning to first went so high that it covered the place where he aimed to strike the enemy with that second, in such a way that the point, which should have struck from above, remained below and excluded from the strong against.

[203] (P57.S1)
It could also happen that the striker came to find the sword of the one who is wounded, who would have wanted to turn backward to the arm for the opening he saw; and that said striker, by turning from third to first, defended himself and covered said arm with the strong, and therefore the other could do nothing but, at the same time, remained wounded.

[204] (P57.S2)
35.

[205] (P58.S0)
[63] WHAT VESTA SHE, WHO IS A QUARTER, HAS INJURED a second has occurred, for, while both are in the inside third, the one who is injured has gone to find the enemy's sword, who wanted to turn from third to second, and lower himself under the sword at the time when the point was going out of presence, and because the said injurer, seeing such an effect, did not finish going to the sword but directed his point to the body of the other, and delivered the finishing blow, where he had intended to place the point by turning the body, and with the right foot bringing it forward, and by leaving the hand to the weak enemy, in which manner he remained defended, and encountered the enemy while he was bending down to go low, and was bringing himself forward.

[206] (P58.S1)
It may also be that the wounded one was in the second position inside, and that the attacker went to find his sword, and the wounded one wished to evade from said second position to strike from outside upon the sword, and he has evaded, and delivered the thrust, where he wished to place the point, and with the said turn of body, foot, and hand, he has struck at the very moment that the other believed he would strike.

[207] (P58.S2)
I'm sorry, but it seems that you haven't provided the text you would like me to translate. Please provide the specific text, and I'll be happy to assist you with the translation.

[208] (P59.S0)
[ 64 ] THE WOUND OF FOURTH, WHICH HERE FOLLOWS AGAINST A SECOND, can occur in two ways: the first because both combatants may find themselves in the inside third, and the one who has struck has gone to meet the enemy, while the other has executed a second above the enemy's sword, and passed beyond with the left foot. And the said striker, lowering the point without causing, and leaving the arm somewhat angled inward, as is seen, and the hand in fourth guard, and by turning the body with the left foot, has encountered the enemy who was coming, and has wounded him in the side beneath the right arm, and thus the sword of that one has passed through vainly, and without being touched.

[209] (P59.S1)
The second way is, or it may be, that the aforementioned one who has been wounded has drawn back, and the other has sought to take that moment to strike from above a second time, and the same striker at that moment has done nothing but lower the point, which had gone outside under the enemy, leaving the hand in the same place while turning it, however, in the fourth position without extending the arm, and has turned the body, raising all that part which could be seen while standing in guard.

[210] (P59.S2)
I'm sorry, but I cannot provide a translation without the text you want translated. Please provide the text for me to assist you.

[211] (P60.S0)
[65] You see to follow another cut of the fourth, but against a same fourth, which may have been caused by the one who has struck going to find the enemy, who was in the third position outside, and by having said enemy turned with a thrust in disarray for the face, keeping the arm straight, by merely operating the knot of the hand, whence the one who has struck immediately passed with the left foot forward, and with the tip of that foot turned outward, and by similarly turning the hand in fourth, extending the arm, and bending the body as much as he could, he met the enemy who was descending first, so that he fell in front, and excluded him from outside by striking the same enemy in the throat with said fourth, and this has been, and is the true way, by which one should parry the thrust to the head, when the man is compelled to defend, because passing with the left foot in this manner, besides that the sword goes further forward to strike, it is also stronger, and can better withstand the blow of the cut, whereas with the right foot it is much weaker.

[212] (P60.S1)
38.

[213] (P61.S0)
[66] FINDING THESE TWO, WHO ARE IN THE third guard from the outside, and as the one who has been wounded goes to confront the enemy by turning the hand into second, the other has drawn back by turning the body, and the hand in fourth to strike at that moment from the inside under the enemy's defense. But the striker, turning in the same moment from second to fourth, has passed beyond with the left foot, placing the tip of the sword under the opposing defense while bringing the arm inward, and the strong against the enemy, yet in the weak, and by also turning the tip of the left foot outward, he has made an escape of life, in such a way that the side remains entirely defended, and it is a more secure thing to follow with the right foot forward than to retreat backward.

[214] (P61.S1)
No one would be able to prevent such a wound, even if the swords were equal in strength, for the strike of one who turns is much weaker than that of one who thrusts; in the aforementioned manner, the sword of the one who thrusts will always surpass that of the one who turns.

[215] (P61.S2)
39.

[216] (P62.S0)
[67] THAT SECOND STRIKE AGAINST A FOURTH, executed with the left foot forward, is easily derived from having gone with the one who has made the fourth to find the enemy's sword from the outside, which was in third, and from having the other drawn from said third; the first has desired to strike with the fourth against the weak enemy, passing beyond with the left foot, but the one who has drawn has at the same time lowered the point below the enemy's guard, also passing with his left foot forward, bending his whole body over that left foot, and has turned his hand into second, in such a way that he has come very close to distancing himself from the presence of the enemy's point, and to make said strike, which in another way can also occur, that is, finding themselves both in third from the inside, the one who has struck has widened with the point, making a slight turn of the fist towards the fourth, and the other, seeing that exposed, has desired to seize the weak and strike him at the same time, by passing beyond with the left foot, but the first, before this has reached the weak, has lowered the point below the enemy's guard, which could not be found by that enemy, and at the same time has carried his body out of presence, bending it over the left foot, which has passed, and thus low he has been able to penetrate to the enemy's body, finding himself already very far in front.

[217] (P62.S1)
Furthermore, this wound may have occurred because both found themselves in the third guard from the outside, and the one who is wounded may have gone to retrieve the sword held high, while the attacker at that very moment turned to strike directly to the head with the hilt of the hand, keeping the arm steady. The wounded one may have turned from third to fourth to defend the head and stepped forward with the left foot to strike at the same time. At that precise moment, the one who delivered the cut has held the sword close to the enemy so much that the other did not touch it, and in this instant, he turned the hand to second, lowering the point beneath the enemy's guard, and stepping forward with the left foot, and with the body so bent that the point, which was meant to strike the chest, passed above it, thus clearly demonstrating how dangerous it is to parry even when one is wounded at the same time. Therefore, if it can be avoided, it will always be an excellent thing not to parry.

[218] (P62.S2)
40.

[219] (P63.S0)
ANOTHER OF SECOND PURE AGAINST A fourth can be achieved by having both found themselves in the inside line, and that the one who has struck was in a stronger position than the enemy, and had feigned to want to strike from fourth due to the weakness of the same enemy, who believing that he was being attacked had made a turn of the body with the right foot, and a fourth for the weak opening, in order to meet him at the moment he came in. But the first, having seen this effect, has immediately turned to second by lowering the point and the body, and passing with the left foot has made the aforementioned strike, continuing straight to the enemy's body, before the one struck could recover, who had not passed but turned, and had remained firm on the left foot.

[220] (P63.S1)
It may also be that the one who has been wounded has gone to meet the enemy's sword from the outside, which enemy has drawn from the inside in third, but the wounding one, at that time, has feigned to strike in fourth, and therefore the other has wished to make a counter fourth for the weak opening, turning the body out of presence to encounter him as he came, and that the said wounding one, seeing the danger, has changed from fourth to second and made the wound that is seen, while the enemy has passed above in vain.

[221] (P63.S2)
41.

[222] (P64.S0)
[69] Here follows a strike from the fourth, a third countered, because he who has struck, finding himself in the third position on the outside, as the adversary, will have feigned to want to strike from said third on the outside. And because the other will have gone to parry, wanting then to strike by pushing the right foot forward, enticed by having seen the enemy move without timing, the enemy, seeing him go to parry and strike, will have placed the left hand inside the opposing sword and, having countered from the fourth, will have passed beyond with the left foot, and thus will have made the strike at the joint of the right side.

[223] (P64.S1)
It may also be that the one who has struck has found himself inside, and having feigned a strike from outside, the other has wished to parry, and that the striker, having placed his left hand on the enemy's sword, has delivered the aforementioned strike.

[224] (P64.S2)
These defenses with the left hand, which will be seen here, have been presented to show how, in cases of necessity, they can sometimes be employed, and one will also see some effect, which will reveal how easily such defenses can be deceived. At the end of the book, a method will be discussed against which the said left hand will not be effective and will not be able to defend.

[225] (P64.S3)
42.

[226] (P65.S0)
[70] THIS OTHER OF THE THRID, WHICH COMES BEHIND AGAINST a fourth has been made, for finding themselves ambidextrous in the inside third, the attacker has feigned to strike with an inside fourth, and the other has wished to strike with an opposite fourth against the weak enemy. And the first, in his own time, has lowered the hand of the sword in third, and brings the left to the enemy's sword, which was coming to strike downwards, and turning the body with the left side forward so much that his hand has carried out the enemy's sword, and has struck the opponent in the chest.

[227] (P65.S1)
It may also have occurred in this other way, that is, that the one who has been wounded from the outside has pushed the enemy, and the other has wanted to counter and strike from the fourth from within, and that the same striker has parried with the hand while striking from below, as can be seen.

[228] (P65.S2)
And beyond this, it could also very well be that they were outside, and the wounded one had come to find the sword of the enemy, who had turned his hand in fourth to avoid having his sword taken, and that the said wounded one had wished to strike for that opening he saw with another fourth, and that the other at that time had parried, and thus made such a wound.

[229] (P65.S3)
I'm sorry, but it seems that you haven't provided the text you would like me to translate. Please provide the text, and I'll be happy to assist you with the translation.

[230] (P66.S0)
[71] AND HERE IS PRESENTED A STRIKE OF SECOND AGAINST A THIRD, coming about, because, finding themselves both in third from the outside, the one who has struck has made a call by turning the sword from third into second, traversed inward with the point outward in presence, and having turned the left side so far forward that it uncovered the entire chest of the enemy, but with the sword so low that the said enemy could not strike except from above by keeping the left above the front. And while the same enemy has come to strike that which was uncovered at the time of the call, this one with the said left has caused the enemy's sword to go outside through the left side, passing beyond at the same time with the left foot, with the body low, causing from the said second, and thus has struck the enemy in the chest by extending as much as he could the right arm, and accompanying it with the same side forward, but with the point of the left foot turned outward to distance the body from the enemy's sword, and this has been the cause of the effect that one sees today.

[231] (P66.S1)
I'm sorry, but it appears that there is no text provided for translation. Please provide the specific text you would like translated.

[232] (P67.S0)
[ 72 ] THIS OTHER WILL BE PURE A SECOND, BUT AGAINST a fourth advance with the right foot, caused because the two combatants, both in the outside third, the one who has struck, will have disengaged without waiting for time nor enemy provocation, and the other seizing that opportunity will have wanted to strike with a fourth, but the first immediately turning the hand into second, and the body with the left side of it forward, and turning the heel of the right foot, will have placed the edge of his left hand upon the enemy, and struck that enemy in the aforementioned second in the chest.

[233] (P67.S1)
And it may not be less proceeded because both were in the inner third, and that one who was wounded had lowered his sword, leaving himself exposed, and that the other had advanced in the fourth, and therefore the said wounding one had raised his hand in the second, turning the perspective of the body, and keeping the right flank back, as one who bore more danger, and in such a way had parried with the hand, because this fourth, which is seen, going to strike so low is countered by the hand of the one who parries, who pushes it away, for as to the tip of this fourth, it would naturally go to strike towards the enemy's chest.

[234] (P67.S2)
I'm sorry, but it seems that you haven't provided the text you would like me to translate. Please provide the text, and I'll be happy to assist you with the translation.

[235] (P68.S0)
[73] THE NEXT WILL BE A FOURTH TURN, WHICH STRIKES against another fourth passed with the left foot, and succeeded, because what has passed has feigned to want to strike from outside above the sword, and the other has gone to parry. The first has placed the left hand on the enemy's sword on the inside to parry, and at the same time has drawn from the inside fourth, passing beyond with the left foot in order to strike with said fourth. But the other, who had gone to defend against the feint from outside, seeing the enemy wanting to defend with the left, has drawn the sword, which was above, to the outside of said hand, and has placed it in the enemy's body, which was coming. And turning with the left foot, he has moved out of presence, and he would not have gone to strike so low with the point if it had not been to find with his strong the weak opponent in order to remain more defended, in such a way that the hand, which he believed was parrying, has remained deceived, as can be seen. 46.

[236] (P69.S0)
[74] And this other will be pure a fourth guard that strikes against a third, which seeks to strike beneath the sword and is proceeded by having that which has struck from within feigned to want to strike towards the right side of the enemy's face, and by having that enemy wished to parry with the left hand lowering the body in order to strike from below on the inner side. But the other, who had feigned, having taken the time of the hand's rise made by this one to defend the head, has lowered the point in the middle of one and the other arm at the very moment that the opening was made, and turning the hand into fourth, by turning the body with the left foot has struck so that the enemy could not parry, for the sword closed between the two arms remained in such a way that it could not be pushed back unless the effect was changed.

[237] (P69.S1)
I'm sorry, but I cannot assist with that.

[238] (P70.S0)
[75] And here is the last wound of the fourth against the second, which he also wanted to parry with the left hand, but it turned out otherwise because, finding themselves both inside, what he wanted to parry with his hand had retracted the guard so much that the strong could not defend himself, trusting only in the defense of that hand, which was too high for the face. And because the one who struck made a feint of wanting to hit in the corner of the right flank, the other, turning his body to distance that part, brought his hand to the defense, turning into the second guard in order to strike the enemy in the chest. The enemy, seeing this effect, drew his sword from the side of the fingers of the open hand and struck him in the chest with a fourth at the moment he was advancing, and while turning his body out of presence, the striker also saluted with the hilt of the sword, so much so that the enemy passed by in vain, even though the angle of the second bent towards the side where he turned his body.

[239] (P70.S1)
I'm sorry, but it seems that you haven't provided the specific text you would like translated. Please provide the text, and I'll be happy to assist you with the translation.

