MASTER: Ridolfo Capo Ferro da Cagli
SOURCE BOOK: ridolfo capo ferro da cagli__the_art_of_fencing
FIELD NAME: Transcription(1610)[edit]bySocietà d’Arme dell’Aquila
TOTAL TEXTOS: 175
================================================================================

[1] (P4.S0)
[ 1 ] CHAPTER I. Of Fencing in General.

[2] (P4.S1)
1 THERE IS nothing in the World to which Nature, wise Mistress and kind Mother of the universe, pays greater attention and diligence than to the preservation of herself; of which, being the man, above all others, the noblest creature, showing herself very tender of his health, she provided him, as a singular privilege, with the hand, with which he not only seeks all the necessary things for the sustenance of life but also arms himself with a sword, the noblest instrument of all, to repair and defend himself against any assault of enemy force, thus according to the right rule of true valor and the art of fencing.

[3] (P5.S0)
2 Where it can be clearly discerned how necessary, useful, and honorable this discipline is for man, and how it serves everyone well, particularly those who, armed with singular valor, are inclined towards the noble profession of arms, to which this science is subjected, as an alternative discipline or serving one, just as the part is to the whole and the means to the ultimate end is subordinate.

[4] (P6.S0)
3 The purpose of fencing is the defense of oneself, from which it also derives its name, for to fence means nothing other than to defend, and shield and defense are words of the same meaning; hence one recognizes the value and excellence of this discipline, which should be as dear to everyone as they love their own life and the health of their homeland, being obliged to spend it lovingly and valorously in the service of this.

[5] (P7.S0)
4 Therefore, it is still seen that defense is the principal action in fencing and that no one should proceed to offense, except through the path of legitimate defense.

[6] (P8.S0)
The efficient causes of this discipline are four: Reason, Nature, Art, and Exercise.

[7] (P8.S1)
Reason as the disposer of Nature.

[8] (P8.S2)
Nature as a powerful virtue.

[9] (P8.S3)
The Art as the rule & moderator of Nature.

[10] (P8.S4)
The Exercise as the Minister of the Art.

[11] (P9.S0)
6 Reason arranges Nature and the human body for fencing and its defense; in Reason, judgment and will are considered.

[12] (P9.S1)
The judgment discerns and understands what it must do for its defense.

[13] (P9.S2)
The will inclines and stimulates towards the preservation of oneself.

[14] (P10.S0)
7 In the body, which serves as a servant executing the commands of Reason, one considers in the person the proper stature, in the eye the liveliness, and in the legs, the waist, and the arms the looseness, strength, and swiftness.

[15] (P11.S0)
8 Nature arranges and prepares the matter, sketches it out, and somewhat adjusts it to receive the final form and perfection of the Art.

[16] (P12.S0)
9 The Art regulates Nature and with a more certain guidance leads us through the infallible truth and the order of its precepts to the true science of our defense.

[17] (P13.S0)
10 The Exercise preserves, increases, and stabilizes the forces of the Art, of Nature, and beyond knowledge, it begets in us prudence in many particulars.

[18] (P14.S0)
11 The Art pertains to Nature and sees that due to the limited capacity of matter, it cannot accomplish all that it intends to do; therefore, it considers in many particulars its perfections and imperfections, and in the manner of an Architect, it takes and creates some beautiful model, thus refining and sharpening the rough things of nature, gradually reducing them to the peak of their perfection.

[19] (P15.S0)
12 From Nature, the Art has taken, in defending itself, the ordinary step, the third guard to stand in defense, and the second and fourth for offense, the time or measure, as well as the position of the person with the body, now resting on the left leg to defend, now pushed forward and loaded on the right leg to offend.

[20] (P16.S0)
13 Because without a doubt the first offenses were those of the fight, in executing which one sees the ordinary step, the third, the second, and the fourth; it is also seen that many know how to engage in the fight very timely and in measure.

[21] (P17.S0)
Against this offense of the fight, the Art surely found the staff, and, not being sufficient this defense, the iron; and I believe that from this matter many different weapons were made over time, but always one more perfect than the other, as the offenses multiplied, until the sword was found, a perfect weapon proportioned to the proper distance, in which mortals can naturally defend themselves.

[22] (P18.S0)
15 The weapons that exceed the distance of natural defense and offense are cumbersome and abhorrent to the use of civil conservation, and those that are too short are treacherous and pose a danger to life; for this reason, in Republics founded on the Justice of good laws and good customs, it has always been and is prohibited to carry arms, from which betrayals and unforeseen homicides may arise.

[23] (P18.S1)
Indeed, in the ancient Roman Republic, where the idea of good governance prevailed, the use of arms was entirely prohibited, and it was not permitted for anyone, no matter how noble or great, to bear a sword or any other weapon except in times of war. Against those who were found armed during peacetime, they acted as against murderers.

[24] (P19.S0)
16 And the Roman soldiers, as soon as they returned home, laid down their arms along with the soldier's garb and took up the long and civil robe, attending to studies and the arts of peace, for no Roman exercised the body (as Sallust says) without the mind: each one, in addition to the study of war, pursued a peaceful trade, for which reason the burdens of war are endured; and thus, as soon as the war was over, there was no longer any mention of captain, soldier, or pay.

[25] (P20.S0)
17 In these times, soldiers are of greater gravity to the Princes and the Lords, and more so to the Peoples in times of peace than in war, and because they are not accustomed to other studies than those of war, they hate peace and most often become authors of turbulent and wicked counsel.

[26] (P21.S0)
18 But returning to our subject, I say that the sword is a most useful and just weapon, for it is proportionate to the distance at which offense is naturally made; and all weapons, the further they deviate from this distance of natural defense and offense, the more beastly and adverse to nature they are, and thus useless for civil conversation. There is one path of virtue and true reason, which is arduous and harsh, from which Nature never departs; but vice and ignorance wander and slip through many ways; one is the straight line, which only the craftsman knows how to make; the oblique lines are infinite and can be made by anyone.

[27] (P21.S1)
Where we see in our times the offenses and defenses multiplying infinitely; the art and human industry at first imitates Nature, and as long as it follows her footsteps, it is useful and beneficial to human life. But as soon as it strays from the path of Nature, it begins to deviate from the nobility of its origin and plunges through the pitfalls of harmful curiosity, sinking the human generation into the abyss of ignorance, leading it from the Golden Age into the ugliness of the mire.

[28] (P22.S0)
19 From the forces of Nature, of Art, and of Exercise, as efficient causes of the defense of which we have thus far treated, arises every advantage and disadvantage of arms, but it primarily derives from the proper height of the person and the length of the sword, for a man of great stature who wields a sword proportionate to his height will undoubtedly come to measure first.

[29] (P22.S1)
In regard to this, to remedy the natural imperfection of those who find themselves inferior in stature, I believe it is prohibited in certain countries to make one sword blade longer than another, for it does not seem just that that which is of superior nature should also prevail over the advantage of the Art, since the privilege of Nature should suffice. Without manifest indignity, in wishing to equal them with the smaller ones, one cannot generally take away from them by attributing a shorter sword to those than to the smaller ones, who might perhaps have other advantages from the art and from practice that would surpass those of nature; to which cases human prudence is not sufficient to provide for so specifically.

[30] (P23.S0)
20 The art of fencing is very ancient and was found in the times of Ninus, King of the Assyrians, who, for the use and advantage of arms, became Monarch and lord of the World; from the Assyrians, the praise of this exercise passed to the Persians, due to the valor of Cyrus; from the Persians it reached the Macedonians, from these to the Greeks, and from the Greeks it settled among the Romans, who (as Vegetius testifies) brought into the field Masters of fencing, whom they called Campi ductores, or doctores, which means guides or Masters of the Field; and these taught the soldiers to strike with thrust and cut against a post.

[31] (P23.S1)
Nowadays, we Italians likewise take pride in the art of fencing, albeit more in the Schools than in the Field, and in the use of the Militia, considering that in these times wars are waged more with artillery and arquebuses than with the sword, which nonetheless serves only to achieve victory.

[32] (P24.S0)
21 This discipline is art and not science, taken however the word “science” in its strict meaning, because it does not deal with eternal and divine things that surpass the powers of human will, but it is art, not productive nor manual, rather active and a very close minister of civil science, because its effects pass together with its operation, like virtue, and having passed, they leave no sort of work or manufacture, as the mechanical and plebeian arts do, which all, although some of them are celebrated with the name of nobility, far surpass and advance.

[33] (P25.S0)
22 The subject of fencing is the precepts of well defending oneself with the sword; its form and the order & the truth of its rules, always true, is infallible.

[34] (P26.S0)
23 But it is now time that, gathering all that we have said thus far in brief words, we come to lay the foundation of this discipline, which is its own proper definition, from which we shall proceed and direct the remainder of all its precepts.

[35] (P27.S0)
CHAPTER II.

[36] (P27.S1)
The definition of fencing and its explanation.

[37] (P27.S2)
24 L Fencing is an art of well defending oneself with the sword.

[38] (P28.S0)
25 It is an art because it is a collection of perpetually true and well-ordered precepts, beneficial to civil preservation.

[39] (P29.S0)
The truth and disposition of the precepts of fencing should not be measured according to the ignorance of some, who teach and write for the long use of the arms they possess and not for knowledge; and therefore, most often they make substance out of shadow and reason out of chance, mixing pumpkins with lanterns and jumping from post to pillar, but it should be valued on its own and confined within the truth of its nature.

[40] (P30.S0)
27 Their usefulness is evident, for they teach the way of defense which is very natural, just, and honorable, and one cannot doubt the great benefit it brings to human life, for daily its effects are clearly seen.

[41] (P30.S1)
For since the sword is a weapon suited to defend at a proper distance, in which both can naturally offend, we see that the combatants almost always remain in defense, rarely resorting to offense, which is the last remedy to save one's life; this would not be the case if the weapon were disproportionate, that is, either greater or lesser than what seeks natural defense.

[42] (P31.S0)
28 The purpose that separates fencing from all other sciences is to defend oneself well, however with the sword.

[43] (P32.S0)
CHAPTER III.

[44] (P32.S1)
The division of fencing, which is based on the knowledge of the sword.

[45] (P32.S2)
29 THERE are the parts of fencing, the knowledge of the sword and its handling.

[46] (P32.S3)
The knowledge of the sword is the first part of fencing, which teaches to understand the sword in order to wield it well.

[47] (P33.S0)
30 The sword, therefore, is a weapon of iron, pointed and suited for defense at a distance, in which both one and the other can naturally and with the danger of life offend.

[48] (P34.S0)
31 The material of the sword is iron, a substance of defense found without equal against that of wood, scarcely sufficient to parry and evade the injuries that one daily inflicts upon the other.

[49] (P35.S0)
The external form of it is that it should be pointed, for if it were blunt, it would not serve to keep the adversary at a distance of natural offense.

[50] (P36.S0)
33 Its end is defense, which primarily means keeping the opponent at bay so that they cannot harm me; this kind of defense is most natural, as it can be enacted without causing harm to my neighbor.

[51] (P36.S1)
And in the Latin tongue, as I have already heard a certain scholar say, to defend does not mean anything other than to ward off, or to distance oneself from something that could harm, if it were to come too close.

[52] (P37.S0)
34 Then the word to defend means to offend and to wound, which is the ultimate and supplementary remedy of defense, in the case that the enemy surpasses the limits of the first defense and approaches so closely that I am in danger of being harmed by him if I do not take precautions; for in fact, when the enemy crosses the boundaries of defense by entering into those of offense, I am no longer obliged to show any respect for the preservation of his life, should he come at me with any weapon suited to offend me, naturally, as I say, within the distance that he can reach me.

[53] (P38.S0)
35 From the end of the sword, which is to defend oneself at the said distance, its length is measured.

[54] (P39.S0)
36 Therefore, the sword must be as long as twice the length of my arm or as long as my extraordinary stride, which length likewise corresponds to that from the sole of my foot up to the tip of my arm.

[55] (P40.S0)
37 There are two parts of the sword, the strong and the weak.

[56] (P40.S1)
The strong begins from the hilt up to the middle of the blade, and the weak is called the remainder; the strong is for parrying, and the weak is for striking.

[57] (P41.S0)
38 The blade is false and straight.

[58] (P41.S1)
The right is that which is downward when the hand is in its natural position, which, turning outward or inward out of its natural place, creates the false edge.

[59] (P41.S2)
The first position, that is the true edge, is known in the third, which is the position of the sword in guard; and the other, that is the false edge, will become evident in the posture of the fourth and second, which are positions of the sword not in guard, but in striking.

[60] (P42.S0)
39 I divide only the weak in the true and false edge and not the strong, for this consideration does not occur with the strong, who serve no other purpose than to parry; and therefore, if it were without edge and thrust, it would not be of any use; in place of the point in the strong is the hilt, not only for gripping the sword but also for covering oneself, and primarily the head, when striking.

[61] (P43.S0)
CHAPTER IV.

[62] (P43.S1)
Of the Measure.

[63] (P43.S2)
40 F IN HORA we have discussed the first part of fencing, which consists of the knowledge of the sword; now we shall begin to address the second part, which is that of its handling.

[64] (P44.S0)
41 The handling of the sword is the second part of fencing, which demonstrates the manner of wielding the sword and is divided into the preparation for defense and the defense itself; the preparation is the first part of the handling of the sword, which places the combatants at the proper distance and in a suitable posture to defend themselves in time, and it has two parts: in the first, we discuss measure and time.

[65] (P45.S0)
42 In the second, it concerns the disposition of the limbs of the person.

[66] (P46.S0)
43 The measure is taken for a certain distance from one end to the other, as for example in the art of fencing, it is taken for the distance that runs from the tip of my sword to the waist of the opponent, which may be wide or narrow.

[67] (P46.S1)
Then one takes as a means to measure the aforementioned distance, which in the practice of fencing is the natural arm, that measures all distances, which in the exercise of this art possesses all the qualities and conditions that are expected of a complete measure.

[68] (P47.S0)
44 The measure is a proper distance from the tip of my sword to the waist of my opponent, within which I can wound him, according to which all actions of my sword and defense must be directed.

[69] (P48.S0)
45 The narrow measure is of the foot or of the straight arm; the measure of the foot is of the firm foot or of the extended foot.

[70] (P49.S0)
The wide measure is when, by extending my right foot, I can strike the opponent, and this measure is the first narrow one.

[71] (P50.S0)
47 The narrow measure of firm foot is in which, only by pushing the waist and legs forward, can I strike the opponent.

[72] (P51.S0)
48 The very close measure is when, at wide measure, I strike the opponent in the advanced and uncovered arm, whether it be that of the dagger or that of the sword, with the left foot back, accompanied by the right in the strike.

[73] (P52.S0)
49 The first wide measure is of a whole time and a half; the second is of a whole time, the third is of a half time, in relation to the three distances, which according to their magnitude require more or less speed of time; and this shall suffice to have spoken of the measure.

[74] (P52.S1)
Now follows the doctrine of the time.

[75] (P53.S0)
CHAPTER V. Of Time.

[76] (P53.S1)
The term Time in fencing signifies three different things: firstly, it means a proper span of motion or stillness that I require to reach a defined goal for some design of mine, without considering the length or brevity of that time, as long as I ultimately arrive at that goal.

[77] (P53.S2)
Just as in the art of fencing, to come to measure, I require a certain and proper time of motion and stillness; it matters not whether I arrive early or late, as long as I reach the desired place.

[78] (P53.S3)
Let us take an example that I move to seek the measure and that I go slowly to find it, and that my opponent remains so still that I find it, even though I have arrived somewhat late; nonetheless, nothing can prejudice my design, for I have arrived in time, considering that for as much space as I have moved, my opponent has equally remained still. Thus, my motion matches the time of my opponent's stillness, and his stillness precisely measures my movement. And because in standing guard and in seeking the measure, one only considers the correspondence of the time that the combatants mutually consume in moving and standing still, until they reach a certain point of measure, for this reason, in the aforementioned actions, the swiftness of motion and the brevity of stillness are not taken into consideration. Rather, to take the proper measure, it is more useful that they proceed, as it is said, with leaden shoes, with the body positioned backward and resting upon the left leg in an ordinary step, a posture of the body very suitable for coming forward thoughtfully and with respect to taking the due measure.

[79] (P54.S0)
51 Next, this word "time" is taken in place of "quickness," regarding the length or brevity of motion or stillness: thus in the art of fencing there are three distances and different measures of striking, and for this reason, there are also three distinct times; and here it is not only to be considered that one reaches a certain end, but that one also arrives with a certain quickness and speed, because the wide measure, which is of increased foot, requires a time, that is, a perseverance of stillness or movement of the sword or the lives of the combatants, quite brief, but not so brief as the narrow measure of firm foot; and the very narrow measure seeks a very swift time, for every little movement I make with the tip of my sword and every little pause my opponent makes in the distance of the very narrow measure is sufficient for me to execute my design; and because this time is very brief, we shall call it half-time, and consequently the time consumed in striking from the less narrow measure of firm foot will constitute a whole time, and the last time employed in striking from the wide measure, which is of increased foot, will make a whole time and a half.

[80] (P55.S0)
In the first time, which is that of seeking the wide measure, one does not consider the swiftness of motion and stillness; therefore, it is not necessary to measure it by means of the entire time, which manner of times is only regarded in striking.

[81] (P55.S1)
For this reason, the position of the body when striking is entirely contrary to that which is observed when seeking the close measure, for the first position is suited to gradually seek the close measure, while the other is bold and swiftly lunges to strike.

[82] (P56.S0)
[ 11 ] 53 Time is nothing but the measure of stillness and motion; the stillness of the tip of my sword measures the motion of my opponent's life, and the motion of my opponent with his life measures the stillness of the tip of my sword.

[83] (P56.S1)
Now, in order for this time to be right, it is necessary that for as long as the life of the opponent is halted, so too must the point of my sword move; and thus, for example, if I find myself in a wide measure, with the intention of coming to a narrow measure, I now move the point of my sword to reach that said point, while I move, it is necessary that the opponent halts his life, and thus the stillness of my opponent's life is the measure of the movement of the point of my sword.

[84] (P56.S2)
And therefore, if I were to move to strike before my opponent has finished stopping, because the timing would be unequal, I would move in vain or not without great danger to myself.

[85] (P56.S3)
Let us suppose that both of us move to seek the measure, and each gives the impression of having found it, as we both engage to strike: it happens that neither strikes, because the time in which we move to wound was not right concerning the distance we should have first reached; in this example, it is seen that the motion of my point measures the motion of the life of my opponent, and the motion of the opponent's point measures the motion of my life.

[86] (P56.S4)
However, it sometimes happens that many injure one another out of time, having come to an equal measure at a close distance.

[87] (P57.S0)
54 The time that must be considered in the wide measure requires patience, and that of the narrow measure demands swiftness in striking and in departing.

[88] (P58.S0)
55 The time of the close measure is lost either through the failing of nature or through the defect of art and practice.

[89] (P59.S0)
56 Due to a deficiency of nature from the excessive slowness of the legs, the arm, and the waist, which arises from weakness or from the excessive weight of the person, as we see occurring in men who are either too corpulent or too slender.

[90] (P60.S0)
57 Due to the deficiency of the art, when the close measure is not learned to be sought as it ought, with the weight carried upon the back leg, with the ordinary step, and with the arm straight extended, for things must move in unison to produce the same effect, they must also move at a proper distance; therefore, if the point of the sword is too far forward and the leg is back, or if the leg is forward and the arm is back, the sword will never be carried with the readiness, accuracy, and swiftness that is required; for this reason, those who seek the close measure with disproportionate distances of their limbs, although they may reach it, nonetheless cannot be in time to strike, for they will lack the best timing of the close measure, which is that of ready accuracy or swiftness.

[91] (P61.S0)
58 Due to the lack of practice, time is lost, because the person is not yet well loosened in their limbs or when the students adopt some bad habits, chasing after the vanities of feints and counter-feints and similar things of that nature.

[92] (P62.S0)
59 From what we have said thus far, anyone can easily understand how utterly false is what many say, that time is taken solely from the movement made by the adversary with his life and sword. Rather, one must equally regard my own motion, and not only my motion and that of the adversary, but also our stillness; for time is not merely a measure of motion, but of both motion and stillness.

[93] (P63.S0)
60 And concluding this matter of time, I say that every movement and every stillness of mine and of my opponent together create a time, inasmuch as one measures the other.

[94] (P64.S0)
CHAPTER VI.

[95] (P64.S1)
Of the person, and first of all of the head.

[96] (P64.S2)
The head is truly the principal thing in this exercise, placed however in its proper place, for it is that which knows the measures and the times, whence it must be positioned in a place where it can act as a sentinel and scout the land from every side.

[97] (P65.S0)
[ 13 ] 62 The position of the head, when standing in guard and seeking the measure, is correct and appropriate when it forms a straight line with the sword, for in this manner the eyes will see all the stillness and all the movements of the sword and the life of the opponent, and will immediately recognize the parts that are to be attacked and defended, with the head placed in those parts, and thus able to cast visual rays in a straight line. This would not happen if the head were held higher or lower, for it would not spread its rays from every side and thus would not be ready to perceive or evade the moment.

[98] (P66.S0)
63 In standing guard and in seeking the measure, the head rests upon the left shoulder, and in striking, it leans upon the right shoulder.

[99] (P67.S0)
64 In standing guard and in seeking the measure, the head must be withdrawn as much as possible, and in striking, one must push forward as much as one can.

[100] (P68.S0)
65 In striking, one shall regard the head somewhat more from one side than the other, according as one strikes from within or from without, so that it be covered by the guard and by the arm of the sword.

[101] (P69.S0)
66 Other positions and movements of the head that are made while passing, fleeing, and evading life in various kinds of guards and in infinite ways of striking cannot be considered good, because they deviate from the straight line, which I call that which divides my life from the side, together with that of the opponent, just as I call the contrary oblique line that which escapes from my life or that of my opponent, both from one side and the other, according to the rule by which the entire art of fencing is to be measured.

[102] (P70.S0)
[ 14 ] CHAPTER VII.

[103] (P70.S1)
Of life.

[104] (P70.S2)
67 IN standing in guard and in seeking the measure, the waist should be bent and lean back towards the shoe, so that the angle formed with the right thigh barely appears, and the left thigh creates an obtuse angle, so that the left shoulder does not align with the line of the left foot, and the right shoulder properly divides the middle of the guard's stance.

[105] (P71.S0)
68 In striking, the waist is pushed forward, so that the right thigh forms an obtuse angle with the waist and the tip of the shoulder corresponds to the tip of the right foot, while the left thigh and leg are brought forward across in an oblique line, so extended that the left shoulder divides the step being taken in half.

[106] (P72.S0)
69 And when one goes to strike, the life must be pushed forward in a straight line, so that due to the difference in striking from the outside and from the inside, leaning somewhat more to one side than the other, it deviates very little from the straight line.

[107] (P73.S0)
70 The reason why life is thus bent is this: first, because in this way the longer they extend and the more they cover, the better they guard and defend the parts that can be harmed, for a target that is further away is much harder to strike; furthermore, in striking this way, the blows are delivered longer, quicker, and stronger, for the further the attacks come from, the more secure and better they are.

[108] (P74.S0)
71 Besides the bending of the waist and the shape it takes when assuming guard, in seeking measure and in striking, one similarly considers its avoidance, which reduces its width, just as the bend diminishes and constricts its height.

[109] (P75.S0)
[15] 72 The avoidance of life should be such that one shows no more than the middle of the chest, not only when standing in guard and seeking the measure, but also when striking, for the less of the chest that is shown, the more one can advance and strike in a straight line, and the more one exposes oneself, the more one loses of measure and timing.

[110] (P76.S0)
73 To those who delight in the guards and counter-guards, and in the tightening here, there, above and below, the feints and counter-feints, the lateral steps, the leg parries and the crossings, necessarily form and move the body in many strange ways, which, like things done at random and without any stable and true foundation, we shall deliver to their authors.

[111] (P77.S0)
CHAPTER VIII.

[112] (P77.S1)
Of the Arms.

[113] (P77.S2)
In this position of guard and while seeking the measure, the right arm should remain somewhat bent, so that its upper part extends in an oblique line downward, such that the elbow meets the bend of the waist and aligns with the right knee, and its lower part, slightly withdrawn, together with the sword forms a straight line.

[114] (P78.S0)
75 In standing guard and in seeking the measure, the left arm together with the thigh and left leg must counterbalance the waist and the right thigh and leg, and its upper part should be extended, so that it aligns with the left knee and counters the bend of the left hip, while its lower part should remain somewhat gathered, to assist in pushing the waist forward when striking, which it would not accomplish if it were to hang as if abandoned.

[115] (P79.S0)
76 In striking, the right arm should be extended in a straight line, turning the underside of the hand and arm upwards, now from the inside, now from the outside, depending on which side one strikes from.

[116] (P80.S0)
In striking with the left arm, it should not be so extended that it forms a straight line with the arm held straight; by turning it, one strikes either from the outside or the inside, for any slight advance of the arm or if it is held in an oblique line would greatly diminish both the measure and the quickness of the time.

[117] (P81.S0)
78 The sword is considered a whole member with the arm, and with the lower part of the arm it must form a straight line that rightly corresponds to the bend of the right side, and it must divide the waist in terms of its length and width into two equal parts; however, in standing in guard and in seeking the measure, the reason why it must rightly return to the bend of the side is this: that every time it stands in this position, it will be ready to assist all its parts that may be threatened, since the upper part, that is, from the top of the head down to the bend of the side, measures the lower part from the bend of the side down to the knee, and it does not happen to regard the legs, for in the natural distance of the foot's offense increased, they cannot be threatened without exposing the waist to manifest danger.

[118] (P82.S0)
79 The position and the posture of the sword in striking is one with that of its arm, turning the false edge upward in the act of striking, depending on whether it strikes from the outside or from the inside.

[119] (P83.S0)
80 Let it be noted diligently that the point of the sword should always guard the uncovered parts of the enemy, which are those of the right side and the right thigh, and one should not be diverted from this intention by the uncovering of the left parts, for this is a measure and time that is deceptive, as they can be raised suddenly, which does not happen with the right parts, which necessarily present a target.

[120] (P84.S0)
81 The gathered arm is not good for being in guard, because it does not properly reveal the measure in which I find myself; it is likewise not good for seeking the measure, because the tip of the sword is too far from the opponent's waist, hence it cannot take the proper measure, nor strike in time.

[121] (P84.S1)
Moreover, by thus withdrawing the arm, one does not keep the opponent at the proper distance, at which he can strike me, and thus it does not fulfill the purpose for which the sword was primarily created; similarly, it is not useful for striking, because one cannot hit at an increased measure, since standing with the point so far from the opponent, one cannot rightly take that measure, which is so much more excellent than the narrower measures, as it is better to strike the opponent from afar than from close.

[122] (P84.S2)
Hereafter, it is not good to deliver the thrust, which, together with the arm, is released by the push that the waist makes forward, and it is not true that extending the arm increases the measure, but rather with the extension of the waist and the step forward; for the forward leg and the waist, in thrusting the arm with the sword, rests upon the back leg, upon which the whole waist leans with the straight leg. This left leg, in delivering the thrust, pushes the waist and thigh forward over the straight leg, which interchangeably acts as a pillar and buttress, supporting the entire weight of the waist thrust forward to deliver the blow.

[123] (P85.S0)
82 The arm fully extended in guard and in seeking the measure cannot be tried, for it forces the sword out of its proper and fitting place to defend one's own life and to offend that of the adversary, and in striking it does not aid in delivering the blow and carries it with less strength; other positions and movements of the arms do not desire the play of striking in a straight line.

[124] (P86.S0)
CHAPTER IX.

[125] (P86.S1)
Of the thighs, legs, feet, and the step.

[126] (P86.S2)
83 IN standing in guard and in seeking the close measure, the right leg with the thigh and its foot look straight ahead and hang back in an oblique line like a shoe, and the left leg with the thigh and its foot looks straight towards the left side, with the knee bent as much as possible, so that the inside part of the heel directly corresponds to the tip of the right heel.

[127] (P87.S0)
84 In striking, one bends the knee of the right leg as much as possible, so that the leg and thigh form a very acute angle, while conversely, the left leg with the thigh extends forward in an oblique line, resembling a shoe.

[128] (P88.S0)
85 The step is a proper distance of the legs, both when stopping and when moving, aimed at taking guard, seeking measure, and striking; in relation to distance, the step is either completely narrow, or half a step, or a proper step, or extraordinary.

[129] (P89.S0)
86 In the practice of fencing, I do not take any good steps, save for the ordinary one, in which life stands comfortably and well-balanced in guard, seeking with a slight increase of step the narrow measure, which, if one were to seek it with smaller steps, the base, being too narrow and weak, would not bear the weight of life and would become disordered; unless gradually, but with steps and half-steps, one seeks the measure, and losing time, would not discharge the blow with such swiftness, and if indeed those good steps will serve, they will be out of measure for walking and positioning oneself in guard and for returning to it.

[130] (P90.S0)
87 The step of fencing, we shall call Military or Soldierly, for better understanding, dividing it into ordinary and extraordinary.

[131] (P90.S1)
The ordinary is that in which one stands in guard and seeks the close measure.

[132] (P90.S2)
And the extraordinary one is that in which he moves, widening the step forward to strike.

[133] (P91.S0)
88 The step in relation to the site can be considered in several ways: forward, backward, to the side, and across; and this can be done with the legs crossed or not, moving either one leg or both. The legs may move to take a full step, to shorten it, or to change position in order to evade or to avoid the waist.

[134] (P92.S0)
In my opinion, there are only two main ways to stop and to move in relation to the legs.

[135] (P92.S1)
The first way is that which pertains to the guard and to seeking the close measure or to evade it; the other serves to strike.

[136] (P93.S0)
90 The walking from the side, I do not know what purpose it serves other than to create a fine display and show vigor, and to recognize the strengths of the opponent; when another goes to take guard, in this occasion of walking you may make use of all the narrow and proper steps, although in my judgment, even in this, the ordinary still holds the boast.

[137] (P94.S0)
91 I am still among those who use this side-stepping when the opponent is positioned diagonally with the sword to strike him from the outside, but in my opinion, a more expedient way would be to immediately seek the close measure in a straight line rather than to follow his play outside of the rules.

[138] (P94.S1)
Some still use them to escape from life, while the opponent comes to strike you, meeting him with the fourth and the second, either from the outside or from the inside, according to the occasion; but they could meet him so much, considering the time and the measure, with the fourth and the second in a straight line, without crossing the legs.

[139] (P95.S0)
92 The crossing of the left foot towards the right side in the guard is useless and one can do without it, for it hinders the waist and disrupts the motion of the right arm in striking, wasting time; the avoidance of the right leg to the left side of the opponent for the guard is likewise a thing done at random and serves more for a friendly assault than for a question or dispute.

[140] (P96.S0)
93 The passes are not good, for they lose measure and time while you move the left leg, for in that moment the life and the right leg cannot move to strike with the necessary swiftness, nor without the danger of a counter.

[141] (P97.S0)
94 The retreats are necessary primarily in striking, because in the act of striking I necessarily expose my life, and therefore if I were to linger too long, it could easily happen that the opponent would respond to me.

[142] (P98.S0)
CHAPTER X. Of the defense, of the guard.

[143] (P98.S1)
95 Finally, we have dealt with the first part of the handling of the sword, which has taught us the proper distance and the true position of all the limbs of the person, as required for defense; [20] now we shall speak of the very defense itself.

[144] (P99.S0)
96 The defense is the second part of the handling of the sword, which teaches us to use the sword for our defense and has two parts, of which the first is the defensive, or guard, as we may call it, the other is the offensive.

[145] (P100.S0)
97 The guard is a position of arm and sword, extended in a straight line in the middle of the offensible parts, with the waist well adjusted to its ordinary step, to keep the adversary away from any offense and to strike him, should he approach at your peril.

[146] (P101.S0)
98 The third, therefore, is solely a guard, not placing the hilt outside the knee, but rather so that it rightly divides the body in the middle, neither high nor low, but just in the center of the parts that cannot be covered, in order to be equally ready and close to all its offenses and defenses.

[147] (P102.S0)
99 The first and the second are not guards because they are not suited to seek the measure and they expose the body too much, and they are not equally close to all parts of the body that can be attacked and defended; the fourth likewise reveals too much of the body and the manner of striking and does not provide protection.

[148] (P103.S0)
100 Three reasons make it difficult to strike the target, namely the distance of the target, for it remains hidden, so that it can scarcely be seen due to the obstruction of things that overshadow it; and even if it is uncovered, it is that as one approaches, the danger of the blow may suddenly be covered.

[149] (P104.S0)
101 All these virtues are contained within our guard, for it greatly distances the target and removes it as much as possible through the bending and evasion of the body; furthermore, it excellently covers the parts that cannot be evaded, and if any remain exposed, it is ready to assist them, as needed, at an equal distance, and thus it moves securely to seize the proper timing and measure, which is the ultimate perfection of the guard.

[150] (P105.S0)
102 It is not permissible for me to speak of changing from guard to guard, for one guard alone does not make a good defense.

[151] (P106.S0)
103 The offense is a defense in which I seek the measure and wound my opponent.

[152] (P107.S0)
[ 21 ] CHAPTER XI.

[153] (P107.S1)
Of the way to seek the measure.

[154] (P107.S2)
104 There are two parts of the offense: seeking the measure and striking.

[155] (P108.S0)
105 To seek the measure is an offense, in which I, in said guard, seek the close measure to strike.

[156] (P109.S0)
There are three ways to measure the distance, for I seek it either while I move and the adversary remains still, or when I stand still and the adversary moves, or when I move and the adversary moves.

[157] (P110.S0)
107 The time of this action must be just and equal to the final measure of the wide distance, for at that moment the time to seek the measure begins, and it allows for the time of another action, which is that of striking.

[158] (P111.S0)
108 In order for this time to be right, you must have patience until you reach the said distance and do not move to strike before that.

[159] (P112.S0)
109 For example, I stand in guard to seek the measure, the adversary having already entered the bounds of the offense: while he either seeks the measure or attempts to strike me, advancing with his sword, I must hold my position with the tip of my sword so that I reach the end of the wide measure and do not move to strike before.

[160] (P112.S1)
Because in this action, its motion must measure my stillness and my stillness must measure its motion, for if I were to move before my stillness, before it reaches the end of the wide measure, the time would not be right, and thus I would not have sought the measure well; and this motion and stillness, equal and infinite, in order to reach the beginning of the narrow measure, is one time and it does not matter how quick it is, as long as it is equal and corresponding to the last term of the wide measure; and thus the end of the time of the wide measure is to seek the narrow measure and the beginning of the time of striking.

[161] (P113.S0)
Many, in seeking the close measure, draw and counter-draw, make feints and counter-feints, tighten the sword by a palm and more, and move from every side, twisting the waist, extending and retracting in many extravagant plays, which are things done outside of true reason and devised to deceive the clumsy and make the play difficult; nevertheless, the tightening of the sword, when I cannot do otherwise while seeking the measure in my guard, is necessary, provided that it tightens in a straight line the weak of the enemy's sword with the strong of mine, for that, riding it, without touching, but only in striking, to hurt with the strong the weak of the enemy's sword from within or without according to the occasion of the strike.

[162] (P114.S0)
111 The disengage, if it is good, is good in the occasion that the opponent has closed in on me and lifted me from the straight line: at that moment it would be permissible, indeed necessary, for me to withdraw by disengaging with a slight yielding of the body or feet, immediately placing myself back in the straight line to seek the measure, for the disengage is done against the closing in, and just as the closing in is done by advancing the sword, so the disengage must be performed by withdrawing it.

[163] (P115.S0)
CHAPTER XII.

[164] (P115.S1)
Of the Striking.

[165] (P115.S2)
112 The strike is the final offensive action of fencing, in which, once I have arrived at close measure, I move with my waist, with my legs, and with my arms, all at once pushing forward with greater force to strike the opponent; and this is done either from a firm stance or with an increase of the step, according to the size of the close measure and as it is more convenient for me to take one measure over the other, for if due to my delay or the opponent's fury the first measure should vanish, I could make use of the second, striking from a firm stance, for in this case it does not happen that I hasten my step more than by merely bending my right knee; it does not suit me to seek a closer measure, lest I should have to increase my step.

[166] (P116.S0)
The act of striking is done in three ways, for I can strike the opponent while I remain still and he moves to seek the measure or to strike me, or while he remains still and I move to seek the measure, or because we both move to seek the measure and to strike; only this is the difference, that when he moves to strike me, I should strike him while standing firm, for when he moves for that purpose, he may poorly take the proper measure to strike him with the increase of his step, and therefore I must take hold of the tighter measure; and when he moves to seek the measure, I should strike him with the increase of my step.

[167] (P117.S0)
In consideration of the parts of the body in relation to the sword, I strike either from the inside or from the outside, from the inside in the fourth position and from the outside in the second position, high or low, according to the exposed part of the opponent's body that gives me the measure in relation to the point of my sword.

[168] (P118.S0)
115 While I strike, I necessarily parry at the same time, inasmuch as I strike in a straight line and with my body in the proper disposition: for when I strike in this manner, at the right time and measure, the opponent will never hit me, neither with the point nor with the edge, because the forte of my sword moves in a straight line and covers all of my life.

[169] (P119.S0)
116 The cut is of little importance, for I cannot wound with a cut at the said distances of close measure, as the movement of my arm and sword does not expose me entirely nor give measure and time to the opponent to strike me; and even if there is some utility in the cut, it is not that within the same measure and at the same time a greater advantage cannot be shown with the point.

[170] (P120.S0)
117 But without a doubt, on horseback it is better to strike with the edge than with the point, because I am carried by the legs of others, and thus I am not well positioned to seek the measure and the timing that is suitable to thrust forward the body and the arm. However, it is indeed true that I can turn my arm at my pleasure, which is a movement proper for striking with the edge.

[171] (P121.S0)
[ 24 ] CHAPTER XIII.

[172] (P121.S1)
Of the dagger.

[173] (P121.S2)
In this brief chapter, we need only to remember that the dagger is found to better save oneself, in case the opponent, while I deliver the strike without waiting to defend, should pull me where it is most convenient for him; for there is no better use of the dagger than to evade the counter.

[174] (P121.S3)
And just as all conveniences bring and entail some inconvenience, so it has happened with the art of the dagger, which cannot be employed without somewhat exposing the life and slightly compromising the line in striking.

[175] (P121.S4)
This is the purpose of the dagger, but the art, then deviated from its original aim, gave it, just as it did to the sword, various effects, which would be better executed with the sword alone, without pursuing so many lengths.

