MASTER: Francesco Fernando Alfieri
SOURCE BOOK: francesco fernando alfieri__first_part
FIELD NAME: Transcription(1653)[edit]byAndrea Conti
TOTAL TEXTOS: 191
================================================================================

[1] (P62.S0)
[ 01 ] THE ART OF PROPERLY HANDLING THE SWORD BY FRANCESCO ALFIERI PART ONE.

[2] (P62.S1)
CAP.

[3] (P62.S2)
I. ALL the arts that have been invented, and are worthy of commendation due to convenience and necessity, should be recognized by everyone as true witnesses of the greatness of human ingenuity, and among others, Fencing is the one that deserves every praise because it not only serves to defend the life in which our good is placed and founded, but also the honor that is placed above life, and the very soul, which is greater than life, and of the honor that is miserably lost in voluntary and agreed duels; therefore, if we believe the writers, we have learned from animals to weave, to build, to navigate, to sail, and more arts that are found to have been learned from us, Fencing has been taught to us by Nature, which in all her works is so industrious in preserving us; we see this in children themselves while they are at that age when, instead of reason, they are guided by instinct, for upon sensing an offense, they quickly prepare themselves with different motions to defend against it. Thus, measuring nobility with time, it is as noble as man, for it has begun with man; although Nature has given it origin, she has nonetheless left its merit to choice and prudence, being content with those initial dispositions that have been perfected by judgment, reason, and experience. In this way, through the teachings it contains, having become an art, the most illustrious and famous nations of the world have always practiced it with great esteem; the peoples full of blood, quarrelsome, and ready to commit injuries and avenge them were the first to put it into practice and to enhance it. The Greeks, who already flourished in all virtues, had Public Academies where the youth was taught by professors, knowing this, the most wise fathers who governed the state understood how important it was in war to expand domains and to face formidable enemies, to muster an army of trained men, practiced in arms, and advantageous in striking. And if the princes of this time, full of turmoil, in which it seems that peace has been banished, paid greater attention to it, they would find that the expenses incurred in a craft of such consequences would yield useful results. I will not speak of the Romans, who through the study and practice of arms carried their Eagles to the most remote parts of the universe, and who still made use of it in the cruelest pastimes of spectacles, which would lead me to stray from my field and discuss matters belonging to those who are far more learned than I am. And focusing on the particular, the confidence of a Knight who knows himself well-disciplined is indescribable when he prepares to engage with the sword. There are some of spirit who stretch their thoughts so damagingly that they claim that only daring and strength are sufficient, and that in duels and brawls, the observance of timing and measures has no place, and that these are nothing but subtleties that are of no value outside the schools. To confirm this beautiful opinion, they immediately resort to the example of some master of arms who was killed by an ignorant person; those who have such whims in their heads are more deserving of compassion than of a response. Daring and strength are gifts of nature, and it is an easy thing to be equal in this because he who has a sense of honor will never be timid with shame, and to reach the mortal parts with arms, the arm of Rodomonte is not necessary. But we know that if two must fight, one is the weaker according to the opinion we have presented, there would be no hope; a most false thought. Let a rough and strong man, having no imaginable knowledge of how to govern himself in striking, fight armed with sword and dagger against one inferior in strength but skilled in the art, and it will be seen who remains in the ring. Knowing the measure and the time and knowing how to use them are not subtleties; they are certain, infallible reasons that are not given to believe with beautiful speeches and with the arrangement of words, but are demonstrated through action. The example of fencers is ridiculous, and because it is a rare thing, and occurs like a miracle, this is preached; but those who are killed by fencers are silenced and not spoken of as an ordinary thing, and without wonder, we are all subject to injuries, and however moderate a man may be, he can be compelled to resort to the sword. Reason prevails over all things; it is reason, finally, that adjusts the blows, makes them mortal, and arranges the strength; it is the foundation of Fencing.

[4] (P63.S0)
[ 06 ] OF THE SWORD.

[5] (P63.S1)
CAP.

[6] (P63.S2)
II.

[7] (P63.S3)
The weapons with which one fights have been of various materials and forms, depending on how sharp or dull the minds were that invented them. The first were the poles, the spikes, the clubs, the maces, and one armed oneself with wood, bones, horns, fish spines, and similar materials suitable for wounding. Human greed, wanting to see what lay in the bowels of the earth, found iron, and as a punishment, it was immediately fashioned to offend. Among all the forms it takes, the noblest is the sword, used by all sorts of people, but more fitting for civilians and soldiers—those to defend honor, and these to acquire it.

[8] (P63.S4)
The Princes themselves carry it, and with it they confer the orders of Chivalry, and it is usually the ordinary instrument with which, where permitted, every dispute is commonly resolved; its parts are two edges and a point, and by being of a proportionate size, one can manifest through its means what is contained in the art; its blade is divided with some difference, Salvadore Fabbris, a man of great renown in our profession, divides it into four parts, or quarters, as we wish.

[9] (P63.S5)
The first close to the hand of all, the strongest, and with which one can defend and withstand every most vigorous blow.

[10] (P63.S6)
The second, which follows as somewhat weaker.

[11] (P63.S7)
The third unskillful against the cuts.

[12] (P63.S8)
The fourth is entirely useless for defense; but in offense, it is the principal above all, not only with the point but also with the edge when striking is accompanied by the third part of that blade.

[13] (P63.S9)
I shall present my opinion, and not deviating from the understanding of the Smith, it seems to me that it is better to be distinguished, dividing it into five parts, and thus proceeding according to the order I have proposed; I say that we must first consider the two extremes, namely the Weak by nature which is the point, the Strong by nature which is the part near the hilt, and the Temperate which is the middle part placed between the two extremes, and among the extremes, and the middle I place two other parts, the upper towards the point and the lower towards the hilt, and these are weak and strong respectively according to which part is referred to as stronger or weaker, and such a division made by me is to be preferred to any other for having the perfect knowledge of the Sword.

[14] (P64.S0)
[ 09 ] OF THE MAIN FOUNDATIONS of Fencing.

[15] (P64.S1)
CAP.

[16] (P64.S2)
III.

[17] (P64.S3)
All arts have their foundations and precepts; without these, one cannot help but operate poorly, and the art that we call art would not be art. Therefore, time and method contain within themselves the entirety of fencing.

[18] (P64.S4)
Time is nothing but knowing, and taking advantage against the enemy of that movement, in which the path of striking is revealed in some part of the body.

[19] (P64.S5)
The method primarily encompasses the posture of the Knight, the guard, pressing the enemy, retreating, finding the Sword, fleeing it, striking from a firm stance, or in passing, with the left foot or right, with a cut or a thrust, defending oneself, attacking, and saving oneself. These skills are acquired with greater or lesser brevity, depending on the aptitude and disposition of the learner, and the will and understanding of the teacher, as will be distinctly shown in each of its chapters. And although good sight, boldness, agility, strength, and wit are gifts of nature; this does not mean that those who have not been privileged should be disheartened and lose courage, for through practice, bodies can be trained to dexterity and to exertion, and the timid gain audacity when reason and the habit of knowing how to defend oneself increase confidence. Moreover, spirits that are often dormant in idleness are awakened through exercise and emulation.

[20] (P65.S0)
[ 11 ] OF THE EXERCISES OF THE KNIGHT.

[21] (P65.S1)
CAP.

[22] (P65.S2)
IV.

[23] (P65.S3)
To ensure the strikes learned in this art of craft, one must prepare oneself for dexterity and agility, as we have previously mentioned through practice. For this reason, it is greatly beneficial to become accustomed to handling poles or other heavy objects to strengthen the wrist and not feel the weight of the sword. I commend the Pike, the Great Sword, wrestling, and as is customary in many places, throwing the Staff and vaulting onto the Horse. And lacking similar opportunities outside of the School, it is good to have a very heavy Sword and to practice daily by striking at a small target fifty or sixty times, marking the sign to know how much the strike is lengthening. Many benefits arise from this practice, the main one being the ability to strike accurately, an advantage such that one can place the Sword for every opening and cover oneself freely. Furthermore, it extends life and strengthens the arm, which leads to ease in using the dagger, the buckler, the gauntlet, the shield, and all defensive weapons. It is necessary, however, that the Master regards the progress of the student as his own honor. Many understand but do not wish to teach; sensible and good men are always far from these defects. Meanwhile, being constrained by circumstance, one must cautiously put into practice what is learned. Striking from a firm stance protects against many inconveniences if the proper distance and measure are observed; one does not parry unless at the same time one responds, and in assaults, one should strive to engage with those who know more, for from them one learns.

[24] (P66.S0)
[ 13 ] OF THE MEASURES OF THE ART.

[25] (P66.S1)
CAP.

[26] (P66.S2)
V. N It is not possible for invention to be so free that it can find new terms without destroying them; this is the prerogative of those who have rediscovered the Art. To us remains the merit of order and of knowing how to perfect it. Therefore, I come to the measures of Fencing, in which consists the striking and the defense, and being exactly known, both are possessed.

[27] (P66.S3)
There are three that are observed by all: wide measure, narrow measure, and perfect measure.

[28] (P66.S4)
The wide measure is when the Knight, widening his stance firmly, barely reaches the enemy with his power.

[29] (P66.S5)
The close measure is when, without movement of the foot, and only by extending the arm and bending the body, one can reach and surpass the target.

[30] (P66.S6)
The perfect measure is when one extends the arm, the body, and the step, but without losing balance or exerting force; the first is weak and slow, for in the strike almost the entire body is abandoned; the second is dangerous due to the short distance from the point of the sword to the body of the enemy, and in such tight quarters, the art can be poorly employed, as it is less likely to escape grappling, and then it is not he who knows more, but he who is stronger and more vigorous that usually remains the victor; the third is the most perfect and should be prioritized above all as it is more convenient and less subject to accidents. With all this, I praise the practice of striking long, for by making the habit of exerting the strike become natural, one avoids the inconveniences that may arise, and one can fight with the advantage of wounding the enemy from a distance that those who have not trained cannot reach.

[31] (P67.S0)
[ 15 ] OF THE WAY TO SEEK THE MEASURES.

[32] (P67.S1)
CAP.

[33] (P67.S2)
VI.

[34] (P67.S3)
There are ways to find the measure in a duel; the first is when one moves, and the other waits; the second is when the Knight stands still, and the enemy moves; the third is when both move against each other at the same time, and while well covered in guard, they study each other with the point of their weapons to gain an advantage in striking. In this third way, one must seek the measure in a straight line, keeping the body and arms united, and upon reaching the point of being able to strike, observe every gesture and movement of the enemy to investigate their nature, and to know how to take advantage of it to be able to close in, deceive, and without being harmed, to gain the upper hand and strike them. I criticize those who make the intent and wish to proceed in the face of the enemy, feinting and counter-feinting, now from one side, now from the other, and having no foundation, they believe that by lowering and raising the body and arms, they are finding the true way to measure. These are all fantasies, mere frivolities, which bring nothing but harm, and only serve the enemy to take advantage of the many movements to find the time to strike, to seize the ground, the sword, and ultimately, life itself.

[35] (P68.S0)
[ 17 ] OF THE TIMES OF THE ART.

[36] (P68.S1)
CAP.

[37] (P68.S2)
VII.

[38] (P68.S3)
The measure and all other parts of the fencing depend so much on timing that without it, there is no doubt they remain useless. This is nothing other than that moment in which the enemy presents the opportunity to strike him. This can occur either due to the falsehood of the guard, which, by not covering him, makes him a target, or by raising the sword in presence, or by any other movement without rule. While one finds oneself in measure, there are wonderfully pernicious and unfortunate defects, and therefore they must be avoided with the utmost care, always keeping in mind that the point of the sword, along the same line in which it is placed, strikes at the place where it is intended.

[39] (P68.S4)
Some, by stamping their feet, widening their arms, and with various contortions, presume to gain time; they lose it instead, for they are either out of measure and thus useless, or they are in measure, and they are deadly.

[40] (P68.S5)
It is still regarded by the knowledgeable as a movement they call a counter-time, which is nothing more than a trick of knowing how to induce the enemy to make a move, and to anticipate him; this requires great quickness and mastery for the subtlety of the strike that must be delivered in an instant.

[41] (P68.S6)
It sometimes happens that both parties strive to strike at the same time; then arises the encounter, which is of two kinds: voluntary and accidental. The former is an excellence of the art, while the latter is entirely a matter of fortune, and contrary to the little understanding of some. The voluntary encounter differs from the mishap in that it involves deception, whereas in the encounter, only virtue plays a part.

[42] (P69.S0)
[ 19 ] OF THE GUARDS.

[43] (P69.S1)
CAP.

[44] (P69.S2)
VIII.

[45] (P69.S3)
The main foundation of fencing is the guard, for in this lies the principle of defending oneself and striking. The guard is a posture crafted with skill, where the sword, the arm, and the stance are positioned in such a way that, being well situated throughout one's life, one can easily overcome the enemy.

[46] (P69.S4)
As for the sword, many who love new things, even if extravagant, more than the truth; in order to be regarded as great spirits and almost reformers of fencing, teach to hold it now with the point aimed at the enemy's right foot, now crossed, and now from one side and now from the other, not realizing that such inventions are all ridiculous, for being out of presence is little less than lost. I believe it should be adjusted to the nearest part by keeping the point alive, so that it cannot be observed, and all paths to dominate it are closed to the enemy. Likewise, the arm should neither be too extended nor too gathered; the former is weak, the latter distant. They will form the natural step, and the body should be gathered and somewhat curved to present a smaller target and give greater strength to the thrust.

[47] (P69.S5)
There are four guards in order, First, Second, Third, and Fourth.

[48] (P69.S6)
The First is named from the position in which the hand is found; having drawn the Sword, the others arise from the hand, and from the arm as they lower and turn.

[49] (P69.S7)
The Iron Head in the Chapter.

[50] (P69.S8)
X. It so diminishes the First and the Second that it absolutely claims they are not guards; this opinion is poorly held, for they are also guards, even if they are not as perfect as the others. I do not deny that they have some exposure, and that due to the fatigue of the arm we cannot call them weak; nevertheless, they are good against the offense of cuts, and the strong is so advanced that he is closer to the enemy's sword than to the place he must defend. There are valiant men who prioritize the Second over the others, demonstrating that the arm, when moving with the sword, forms a circle, and that the Second is its natural diameter, for one who finds himself in this position cannot be harmed except above and around the knee, which can be avoided as it is a distant part, and consequently the blow is quite weak in striking. At the same time, we can wound the enemy forward in a straight line while the sword is free, and one knows how to take the time.

[51] (P69.S9)
To these four guards, I add the fifth, which until now has not been conceived by others, and I call it Mista because it partakes of the Third and the Fourth, and by me is placed before all the others to encompass all the perfections together that are found in the others. This will be demonstrated by me quite extensively in the following Figures, without which fencing would be exceedingly deficient, as the effects of the reasons cannot be represented by words alone, nor can all doubts be resolved, which does not happen in the Figures, where this is manifestly represented with the advantage and disadvantage of striking, showing through good and bad outcomes the good and bad understanding and discipline of those who fight.

[52] (P70.S0)
[ 22 ] OF THE CARRYING OF THE BODY, AND OF THE STEP.

[53] (P70.S1)
CAP.

[54] (P70.S2)
IX.

[55] (P70.S3)
In the carrying of the body, there are many good and bad consequences in fighting well or poorly, and in this one must take great care because this is what is defended and wounded, and where strikes begin and have their end. Some, primarily all the Spanish masters, argue that one must carry oneself straight without bending, and that one should exert almost no force. They present reasons that in this way, the head is safer, being further away, and all parts of the body are more ready and less fatigued.

[56] (P70.S4)
This opinion, based on the little knowledge I have acquired from seeing and reading for many years, and from experience gained with both white swords and those used in play, does not seem to me to be worthy of approval; primarily because the head is poorly defended by the forte of the sword, in which lies the true defense against strikes that come from a very strong hand.

[57] (P70.S5)
I will not speak of the rest of the body, which, not being covered and made lesser with some bending, is less defended and a more open target to receive blows. And considering it in the act of striking, its thrusts will be slow, and consequently of no danger. And if one were to tell me that in delivering a blow the body bends, I will reply that either this motion is necessary or it is not; if it is not necessary, it is poorly done; if it is necessary, then why not position the body in this way and gain time? As for lessening the risk to life, I do not deny that standing straight is more natural, but I add that it must be understood in regard to stillness and not motion, for to one who wishes to exert some force, it is natural to bend and to position the body in such a manner that he can more easily exert that force. This will not be achieved by keeping the body straight, as it would be too disunited and consequently weak, and poorly disposed for the desired motion. From this arises another inconvenience, that having elongated the thrust, it can hardly return to its guard, a matter so considerable that without doing this, whatever one discharges in the thrust, if it does not strike, will undoubtedly be lost; and when it strikes, it may still remain vulnerable afterward due to the inability to save oneself with the swiftness that is sought by all.

[58] (P70.S6)
Another opinion, and one held by many who also err in various faults by clinging to the other extreme, is that they form the posture with much violence, taking steps that are too wide, and so hunched that they seem to be almost withdrawn into themselves.

[59] (P70.S7)
This situation of life is vicious, for the force and violence it continuously exerts renders the body slow in motion, and while enduring the Downfall, it is first overcome by fatigue rather than by the enemy. And although it may seem that the body so constrained diminishes the target or does not create openings, nevertheless, since it is not possible to cover the entire body with the Sword, and following the shortcomings that have been indicated, it should not be approved.

[60] (P70.S8)
The truth is the perfect way by which the body is well arranged to defend itself and to strike, which will be when avoiding the extremes, it will hold to the middle with that temperance which is proper to virtue.

[61] (P70.S9)
One must take guard with a proper curvature without violence, and position oneself on the foot that does not move to strike, forming the natural step, as strong and ready to extend with the thrust, thus being restricted in arms, one can easily parry without becoming disordered, and strike with speed, not falling into those defects, which are so pernicious to those who cannot avoid them, and this is my opinion, which will always be approved by those who practice.

[62] (P71.S0)
[ 26 ] OF THE PROPERTIES OF THE FIRST AND SECOND GUARD.

[63] (P71.S1)
CAP.

[64] (P71.S2)
X. For greater clarity regarding what we have discussed in the previous chapter, and to well understand the nature of the guards so that we may employ them with reason, we must examine them more closely, and by comparing them with one another, the defects will be revealed, which are necessary to know in order to properly regulate our choices.

[65] (P71.S3)
The first and the second guard agree in many respects, and therefore they both fall under the same exception. As for that which seems advantageous over the other guards, it is the fact that they are formed with the arm extended and the point closer to the enemy, for if it is true, as is held by all, that the blow which travels the shortest distance is the more irreparable, these are among the most perfect because their strikes are more deadly. Furthermore, if we consider their properties in both, the sword is always positioned directly in line with the eye, and by keeping the point alive, it instills terror. And if the enemy wishes to attempt to strike, he is compelled to raise it out of presence, thus losing time and exposing himself to the evident danger of being preempted by the blow.

[66] (P71.S4)
Could anyone argue otherwise, that finding the Sword in such a high position, and so close, offers the convenience of being seized, and that with the greater part of the body exposed, there should be no manner of defense approved in any way? The answer that resolves this objection is easy; the seizing of the Sword cannot be done without movement, either of arms or of life, and assuming them in due measure, they are so perilous and blameworthy in themselves that it would be superfluous to repeat further words to condemn them. If we consider the exposed parts of the body, these are in a position so distant that due to the shortening and curvature of the guard, it is difficult to be struck, especially since the blow must pass through the strong part advanced far ahead of the enemy's Sword, every little bit of cover takes it off line and renders it ineffective.

[67] (P71.S5)
This is when, in my opinion, one can consider supporting the reputation of those who invented them, and who approve them above others, but because they have within themselves, on the contrary, not a few defects; to overlook them would be a sign either of not having understood them, or of little accuracy: Firstly, in the First and Second guard, one cannot fight for long with violence, as the arm, the instrument of striking, becomes fatigued, and along with it, the whole body; Furthermore, the sword is positioned so high that it can hardly defend against the openings that are made, and it is constrained to find itself in such a position, to break the measure, or to rely on the defense of the left hand, a part subject to the deceptions of feints, and of much danger; Moreover, they are not equally close to the parts that must be defended, and therefore the more distant and less covered ones will always be more exposed to being harmed by the vigilance and cleverness of the enemy, and finally, they are arranged to be subject and easy to be commanded, as they are more suited to wait and defend than to resolve and strike.

[68] (P71.S6)
I do not wish to remain silent that many, comparing one with another, do not agree among themselves; if all were of the same opinion, we would be deprived, both in this and in other sciences, of many sharp and beautiful reasons that have been discovered by the intellect to support that which is proposed as good. I place the Second guard before the First as more natural, stronger, and of greater defense.

[69] (P72.S0)
[30] OF THE THIRD AND FOURTH GUARD, AND THEIR PROPERTIES.

[70] (P72.S1)
CAP.

[71] (P72.S2)
XI.

[72] (P72.S3)
The First and Second guards follow the Third and Fourth, both of which are more perfect and more practiced in duels, and although one can come to the knowledge of this truth from the defects that have been observed by me, all the same, it will become more evident and clearer with the reasons that follow.

[73] (P72.S4)
If we regard the body, it rests in its center, having that temperance in posture which is neither high nor low, but adjusted with every appropriateness for defense and for striking.

[74] (P72.S5)
The step is proportionate to the strength sought in extending the strike and recovering, a matter so necessary and of such consequence that the success of the action depends on it; the side must also be well covered by the line of the arm and the sword, and with the hand placing all other parts correctly, it can, without disorder, easily parry and strike. From this, it is clearly concluded that one is advantageous to the other for many respects, for the uncovered are still few and far away, making it very difficult for the enemy to penetrate with the sword. In this regard, we must note that the opening of the Third is from within, while that of the Fourth is from without, and the reason is that the hand in the former extends more outside the right knee than inside; however, with both, one can freely encounter the enemy's sword both from within and without, both high and low, and one can more easily confuse the enemy and trouble him with feints, disengagements, and other artful movements made in time and according to the skill and strength of the enemy. The parry is swifter, as is the strike, both thrusting and cutting, noting that the defense from without should be made from the Third, with strikes also from the Third, and thus one side is as good as the other and worthy of practice.

[75] (P72.S6)
But although this is so, it remains that there are some exceptions, and in some parts they may be subjected to their disadvantages, and they can be easily discovered and impeded by the opponent's sword with the proper counter-guards, which are nothing but breaking the designs and dominating the blade, as we shall see more extensively in the following chapter. Likewise, they can be anticipated by taking the time and measure, both from within and without, both from below and above, making openings for diameter, and in the noblest part of the body. This primarily occurs when the Third guard is formed with the hand very low, and the sword, having the point raised, produces its angle in the grip, which also leads to another defect caused by the distance of the hand, which, in defending itself, must travel a great distance to reach the upper part to which the strike is directed; it is easy that due to the speed of the enemy's sword, it may not arrive in time. Furthermore, it is almost useless to frequently maintain the sword free and deceive the enemy, and the same also happens in the Fourth guard when it is formed with the same defect of the angle of the hand. Many do this to have a stronger arm in this way and to keep themselves better covered from within, not realizing that instead of becoming advantageous in such a posture, they weaken the defense. It is true that one could avoid these errors by extending the arm and not falling into curves and angles that are so damaging; however, the defects we mentioned above remain in their vigor, although this form of guard, extended, is much safer and more covered, requiring the enemy to strike out of line, which is so dangerous that nothing more could be, as is well known by those who have some understanding of this art.

[76] (P72.S7)
If we must make a comparison between them as to which is the more perfect, I praise both, and between them there is not great inequality, as one and the other arise from the first guard, and now one, and now the other must be preferred according to the quality of the enemy against whom they are to be tested. However, the Fourth, when considered absolutely, seems to me to be the best for being somewhat stronger and more covered, and for the ease and subtlety of the Extraction. Yet, I place the Mixed Guard above both, as it encompasses all the perfections without the defects, as we shall demonstrate much better in the figures of the second book.

[77] (P73.S0)
[ 34 ] ON THE CAVAZIONE, AND ITS TYPES.

[78] (P73.S1)
CAP.

[79] (P73.S2)
XII.

[80] (P73.S3)
The danger, which does not depart from the trial of arms, keeps the spirits so alert for defense that there is no doubt that it is difficult to wound the enemy, who is not discomposed by fear and anger, and who has some practice in the art. However, the one who knows more is always bolder and promptly executes what he trusts and believes he has learned well. It often happens, therefore, that one seeks to find the enemy's sword to seize it or to remove it from presence, and to remain superior; from this arises the Cavation, a movement made by the opponent to escape, both from disadvantage. There are two kinds: Cavation of time and of obedience. The first is that passage made from one place to another with the sword at the time one attempts to find it. The second is when, being covered in the same manner, one frees oneself from subjection. If to execute his thought and maintain the advantage, one accompanies the movement of the Cavation with timing, the Controcavazione is produced, by virtue of which the sword returns to the point from where it was moved. To deceive the controcavazione, the first who began to cavare may double the movement and finish it by gaining it over the enemy's sword, and this is called Ricavazione; and finally, if the point is retained under the blade after having freed it, the Meza Cavazione is formed, used to break the enemy's design and make him indecisive. Many who have experience criticize the Cavar di Spada, and they bring forth several reasons, among others, they argue thus: The Cavation is either done out of measure and serves no purpose, for it is outside the bounds of offense, or it is done in perfect measure, and then it gives the enemy time to wound him. I will say a few words on this difficulty, being able with little effort to make the contrary clear, and first I say it is necessary to be out of measure, to not give courage to the enemy, and to close every way for him to gradually seize the sword, and this is all the more to be approved, as it can be done without danger.

[81] (P73.S4)
When they find themselves within range to strike, then one must seize the moment when strength is applied to the blade, and one must subsequently withdraw and extend the blow, striving with all judgment to take advantage of swiftness, without widening the point or becoming disconcerted, and thus the opponent will be preempted, with their advantages turned to their detriment by the art.

[82] (P73.S5)
One criticizes the circular draw, and consequently also the oval draw, and although this is approved by Salvadore, the great Master of such a profession, it does not seem to me, with all due respect, to follow it, for even in the oval draw the sword tends to form a slight circle and to distance itself from the target, which makes it slower and easier to defend against due to its distance, something that does not happen when the draw is tight and continuous in its line.

[83] (P73.S6)
And because at times one goes to cover the sword to compel him to draw, and at the same time to extend the strike, in this case, it is necessary to return the sword, and with the rising gain the weak, and quickly strike.

[84] (P74.S0)
[ 37 ] OF THE FEINTS.

[85] (P74.S1)
CAP.

[86] (P74.S2)
XIII.

[87] (P74.S3)
The name of deceit is, in itself, odious, and it seems a proposition far from the truth to assert that it is fitting and partakes of virtue. I know this is a matter more for moralists than for masters of fencing; however, as it pertains to my purpose, without putting the sickle (as the proverb goes) in the field of others, no one will deny that the stratagems of war, according to military laws, are approved, as there are many wise men who have gained eternal fame for having taught them. Now, war is nothing other than a duel between two kings, in which deceit is permissible, and if it is a virtue, it must also be so in the duels of private individuals. This deceit of which I speak does not offend either justice or faith, but is a precept of the art to simply overcome the enemy, and it is called Feint. Whatever its nature and purpose may be, it can be easily understood, and to describe it with utmost brevity: it is an ingenious movement made to induce the enemy to defend one part of the body and to strike him in another. The Feints are various; some are made with the foot, others with the sword.

[88] (P74.S4)
With the foot, feints are made to frighten the enemy, and to strike him where, disconcerted by fear, he exposes himself.

[89] (P74.S5)
Such a Feint is dangerous for the one who performs it, and the reason is self-evident, for if the enemy is found out of measure, it is useless; if he is in measure, while one presumes to gain a time, one loses it. I well know that differently it happens with those who lack experience, nor skill acquired through practice, but we must base our strikes on the precepts of the art, not on the shortcomings of those with whom we fight.

[90] (P74.S6)
The Feints that are made with the Sword are subject to the same oppositions, and for the most part are condemned by Masters for the motions they require, with which one is wonderfully prone to being anticipated; nevertheless, speaking always with the due respect for those who feel otherwise, it is my opinion that often they are of great advantage and worthy of being practiced, provided, however, that they are accompanied with the necessary precautions.

[91] (P74.S7)
The first warning shall be to ensure that the Feint cannot be recognized.

[92] (P74.S8)
To achieve this end, we must await some movement from the enemy so that he may believe that the strike precedes that time, and not from the deception of the Feint, for it is certain that by remaining still, he can more easily observe and uncover the designs and thoughts, and use them to his advantage.

[93] (P74.S9)
The Feint must still be made in the part closest to the Sword, which is less guarded, for then, due to the brevity of the space, it can easily strike without being recognized. And in any case, it is a great security to believe that the enemy should not go to the guard but strike at the moment when the feint is made. With this caution, one will take up a defensive position, choosing that course which will be shown by the blow.

[94] (P74.S10)
We shall strike again without cover when the Sword is extended so much that the strong begins to dominate the blade, being unable to be held back, nor drawn from its line, after having penetrated so far forward.

[95] (P74.S11)
Faints are still made with the Sword, and with the foot together; these are more defective because, once the moment is taken when the foot is in the air, it will always place the opponent in great danger.

[96] (P74.S12)
To the feints oppose the counterfeints; and these are nothing but putting into action the deceits to overcome the deceits, for which one shows the intention to strike at the moment of feigning, and while the enemy rushes to defend, one delivers the blow to the other side that is exposed, and such an art of striking is called counterfeint.

[97] (P74.S13)
And finally, among these artful motions that have been invented with cunning, there is a sort of Feints, which are called Chiamate, and they have such a name because a part of the life is revealed, and with this convenience, which is presented to the enemy, it is called in a certain way to strike it, and in this one must observe to uncover that place where it seems to aim, and attempt to draw it where it is known that it has turned its aim to strike. The irritated desire often becomes quite violent, and consequently unfortunate, and we could evade that harm which we have foreseen, while they are irreparable when they unexpectedly befall us; The calls are also made with the body by bringing it closer, or drawing it according to the state of the measure, and of this, there is no hindrance to the speed of the foot to retreat, or to deliver the thrust at the proper time.

[98] (P74.S14)
Being too close is perilous; one must have an eye beside them, so that in making the call they cannot be wounded. Therefore, it is necessary to take great care in judging the distance, in which lies the good or ill fortune of whatever may happen.

[99] (P75.S0)
[ 42 ] HOW ONE CAN KNOW THE NATURE, and the art of the Enemy.

[100] (P75.S1)
CAP.

[101] (P75.S2)
XIV.

[102] (P75.S3)
It is of incredible importance to know how to investigate in duels what the Nature and the art of the enemy are, for from this observance depends most on losing or winning. Few proceed with such prudence, and the writers who have otherwise given great evidence of their sufficiency and good understanding have not taken care nor made mention of such an essential part. It would be entirely ridiculous to believe that one should use the same tricks and the same strikes indiscriminately with every kind of person, without distinguishing between intellect and strength, for that method approved for wounding an irascible man will be condemned in a phlegmatic one. Experience teaches all day long how, when two of equal Mastery are fighting, one will be overcome by us while the other remains superior, and this happens due to the diversity of natures, whether unobserved or unknown. Such a difference is found to be even greater if the disparity of natures is accompanied by the inequality of art, so that it is evident by itself, without my needing to provide further reasons, that it is necessary to seek to penetrate the nature of the enemy and the quality of his play. One recognizes the Nature by stepping outside of measure and considering what resolution the opponent takes. If he moves to attack full of animosity, he is irascible, and this is manifested by his troubled eyes, flushed color, and various uncomposed and restless movements.

[103] (P75.S4)
If he waits, and remains confined in his guard, fixed, without casting his eyes upon you or the Sword, surely from these signs one can make a certain conjecture that such a Man is phlegmatic, not bold, but prudent.

[104] (P75.S5)
As for the art, I speak of those who know, for the ignorant are recognized without much speculation by merely touching, as they wield the sword.

[105] (P75.S6)
There are primarily two differences with which one strikes from a standing position, or in passing, and with other movements.

[106] (P75.S7)
The striking from a firm stance is of two kinds. The first is when, by extending the arm and the body without moving any foot, one delivers the blow; the second manner is when, having settled on the left foot, one delivers the thrust with the step of the right foot.

[107] (P75.S8)
He who wishes to strike from a firm stance, finding himself in any guard, begins little by little to advance, and being well covered in a restricted manner, strives with the left foot to gain measure over the right foot.

[108] (P75.S9)
What in the past, or with other motions, seeks to wound the enemy, waits from afar for him to take guard, and immediately with a natural step moves to assault him, and now retreating, now troubling him around seeks to make him expose himself, and gain some advantage over him.

[109] (P75.S10)
Whether it is better to strike from a firm stance or from a passing step cannot be decided lightly.

[110] (P75.S11)
Many praise the art of standing firm as being more useful in matters, and less dangerous, as one can better observe the distances and timings, and all the tricks that may be devised. Thus, they believe that standing one’s ground in the presence of an opponent, waiting for the right moment, and employing the simple motion of the foot should be prioritized above all other ways of striking.

[111] (P75.S12)
In the encounter, passing with judgment, and often against what the mortal expects, disturbs the enemy, takes him by surprise, and by staying in motion to always have the foot in the air, is without comparison more swift, and ready to seize the moment, to deceive, and the strike is united and strong, and consequently difficult to parry, all the more so when one passes, as the enemy thrusts the sword, or holds it out of presence, and one glides with the blow upon its edge.

[112] (P75.S13)
Both methods, in my opinion, are good for those who know how to take advantage of them. It is true that they should not be used indiscriminately, for with the ignorant and hasty one must wait and strike firmly; with the timid, and those who possess some skill, one must use different movements to increase their fear and overcome them.

[113] (P76.S0)
[ 46 ] HOW WE SHOULD GOVERN OURSELVES against one who strikes from a firm stance, or with a passing step.

[114] (P76.S1)
CAP.

[115] (P76.S2)
XV.

[116] (P76.S3)
In the preceding chapter, we have said many things pertaining to this proposition; nevertheless, it will not be out of place to delve further into the particulars, for greater utility is derived from them, and they are retained more firmly in memory.

[117] (P76.S4)
In the art of firm footwork, the principal foundations are the long strike, the perfect knowledge of measure, the readiness of the hand, and the speed of the step, which combined serve to make this manner of striking almost irreparable. Nevertheless, because in difficult matters lies the honor of the mind, I believe that with certain observations it is not impossible to render it ineffective.

[118] (P76.S5)
One must first, when advancing against the enemy with such intent to cunningly gain the measure, disturb his design, take away his straight line, and disrupt the accuracy of the measure by troubling him, now from one side, now from the other; thus he will be forced to change his resolution, and one will draw him out of his game.

[119] (P76.S6)
The second rule shall be that while one is engaged and locked in guard, one should allow the opponent to come within measure, and by extending the strike, evade by bending or with a shift of life, and having taken the moment in which one retreats to save oneself, accompany it with a long thrust from which it will be difficult to escape.

[120] (P76.S7)
And finally, having come into measure, one can with artifice withdraw, as if out of fear, and by this, taking the opponent's spirit in that which moves to follow you, one can strike with a counter, either from outside, or from inside, or below, or above the sword in the part that is closest and least covered.

[121] (P76.S8)
Those who employ the past often make some movement out of measure to seek the opportunity to deliver the blow, which should be unexpected and certain in striking.

[122] (P76.S9)
Against these, it is necessary to have the vigilant Sword, and the ready and well-disposed body, and when they make the motion to take the time to pass, one must anticipate by seeking to strike them at the same time, from which they will be so disturbed that they will absolutely change their resolution; But if one attempts to try various turns to push the blow where the opportunity presents itself, then at the moment they thrust, one will throw the right foot back, and keeping the arm extended, we will turn the hand in second, and by slightly bending the body, the enemy will come to injure themselves. These are the methods that for now seem necessary to show for resisting, to firm strikes, and to passing as I have hinted, which will be more clearly confirmed in the following Chapter with new reasons, for the precepts of this art are so interconnected that one is compelled to repeat the same things, which if perhaps to some overly refined spirits, is not pleasing, they should not attribute it solely to my little ingenuity, but also to the brevity of the terms, which, for not being very abundant, serve out of necessity to express many precepts that are the foundation of Fencing.

[123] (P77.S0)
[ 49 ] OF THE COUNTERGUARDS.

[124] (P77.S1)
CAP.

[125] (P77.S2)
XVI.

[126] (P77.S3)
It would be beneficial to understand the reason and the use of the Guards, if we did not yet have knowledge of the ways to render them futile when they are employed by the enemy. To this effect, the Counter-Guards have been invented, which are nothing more than an artful position of the body and the Sword to hinder and disrupt the designs made to strike, in which more things must be observed to proceed with prudence and without disorder.

[127] (P77.S4)
Firstly, it is necessary to recognize the opponent from afar, and from their movements and appearances, to investigate whether they are timid or bold. Then, by observing the exposed parts, one will move to engage them. Above all, one must support their sword with their own, striving to dominate it while always keeping an eye on its strong and weak points, as well as the body's position in forming their guard. The resolution must be taken in due time and with the necessary speed, for often the advantage lies in a moment, and the opportunity is rarely found again once it is lost. I do not restrict myself to determining whether one should engage from the outside, inside, below, or above the sword, for this depends on the enemy's guard. However, it must be well observed that when finding the blade, our sword must always be the stronger one, which usually occurs when a greater part of it meets a lesser one. Above all, it is essential to raise the enemy's point out of the way. Our mixed guard is proportioned and arranged to form all the counter-guards, both against the First and Second, as well as against the Third and Fourth. If the enemy comes with their sword low and almost to the ground, which is done by the weak or by those who retreat, then we must gain it with a low Second and strike. If the sword is held high and elevated, we will tighten with a Third from the outside and with an extended Fourth from the inside, in such a way that the enemy, placed in obedience, cannot free it, and is compelled either to save themselves or to strike back, a move so dangerous at close measure, and for the time it is made, absolutely deadly.

[128] (P77.S5)
If he does not wish to engage, and seeks to escape the measure by retreating, then one must pursue him all the more in this case, maintaining the advantage without abandoning it. And thus, without waiting for other moments, one can deliver a firm thrust from the closer openings.

[129] (P77.S6)
And because we have made mention of the gaining of the Sword, this in the counter-guards can be done in two ways, as in every other sort of offense and defense, and they are the motion and the stillness.

[130] (P77.S7)
One earns the Sword in motion while the enemy comes into proper measure, now retreats, now from one side, and now from the other, in stillness when he stands without motion in arms awaiting, and having taken measure through the weakness of another, he seizes his sword, and such dominion must be maintained, keeping it in subjection, and without letting go until he is struck. And because at this point the step becomes forced, we must immediately return to the Blade and withdraw, and in this, we must have as a maxim that it is as praiseworthy to know how to strike as it is to save oneself. Many natures are found that are slow to ignite with anger, but provoked by offense, they become furious, and every day we see by experience that some, when wounded, instead of being dismayed, gain courage, and against expectation bring their enemy to the last terms when he already believed himself to be the victor. The timid thinks only at first of defense, but easily irritated leads himself to despair, and then passes from one extreme to the other, becoming reckless. Therefore, after the wound, we must immediately return to dominate the Sword; according to the situation, the step will be taken, for being narrow it will suffice to only bring the body back, strengthening oneself with the weapon, but when capable, with two natural steps we can save ourselves and find ourselves in guard.

[131] (P78.S0)
[ 53 ] WHERE ONE MUST BEWARE while fighting.

[132] (P78.S1)
CAP.

[133] (P78.S2)
XVII.

[134] (P78.S3)
In combat, one must form a strong guard with the body, and have the parts positioned to easily execute what is said by the art; but it is of great importance to know where we must carefully pay attention while we find ourselves in duels.

[135] (P78.S4)
There are two states of those who fight; the First is considered in perfectly adjusting oneself in guard and seeking the measure, the Second consists in the time in which, having found the measure, we move to strike with the thrust. In the First state, the head is found above the left shoulder; in the Second, accompanying the blow, it moves to the right. In the First, the step is natural; in the Second, forced. In the First, the thigh and the leg are almost in a straight line, while in striking they form a more or less acute angle, depending on how much the thrust is extended. The same occurs in other parts, and therefore it is the opinion of some that the eye should also vary in its object with some diversity. To fully understand this most useful warning, the eye, due to the multitude of visual rays, sees at one time more objects than can all be encompassed within the angle of vision, but not all equally distinct. If we look at the front of a man, we see the whole man at once; now we are dealing with the vision that is made through diametrical rays, and consequently of that object which must be seen most perfectly by us, and upon that falls the diversity of opinions that are discussed among themselves in defining it.

[136] (P78.S5)
To come to the conclusion, I believe that in the first state we mentioned, it is wise to deceive the enemy with the gaze, and that as with a feint one looks in one direction to strike in the part where least expected, from which it follows that ultimately one can disturb the mind of the opponent and put him in some disorder. Nevertheless, what is done in seeking the measure in this regard is not worthy of being observed as much as in the moment in which we find ourselves able to strike and be struck. Some wish that at that time one should primarily regard the eyes, and their reasoning is that these command the movements made by man. Such individuals are greatly mistaken; the eyes have no power over what is executed by us, and to avoid digressing into matters that do not pertain to my profession, the role they play in striking is nothing more than to reveal and indicate the target where we intend to hit. Those who hold the aforementioned opinion could easily be deceived by showing with the eye the intention to strike one part while hitting another, especially since their movements are so swift that they can hardly be accurately observed by us. My thought, and the most secure, is to keep the mind and gaze fixed on that part from which harm is expected, and this is the tip of the sword, consequently observing the hand and the exposed area where the strike is aimed. But this must be done in such an order that the sword is attentively regarded first, and secondarily the target, which can be done without contradiction due to the proximity of the parts and the small size of the object that can be distinctly seen all at once. I consider this without any doubt the truest, safest, and most certain rule that in a contest of such esteem, in which life is at stake, can be practiced by anyone with sharp judgment.

[137] (P79.S0)
[ 57 ] ON THE WAYS OF STRIKING, and the nature of Blows.

[138] (P79.S1)
CAP.

[139] (P79.S2)
XVIII.

[140] (P79.S3)
The aim of duels is to wound; knowing how to do it and being able to do it encompasses all the art, the difference of the Guards, the timing, the measures, and many other precautions, all invented for this sole purpose. This point is quite difficult, especially when those who fight are equal in skill, strength, and daring, for then a very small mistake determines the victory. There are instances where fortune has shown that it too wishes to have its part; a shout, an unexpected noise can frighten them and turn their eyes towards the direction it comes from, which is very natural for man, and at the same time gives such an opportunity to the vigilant opponent that he may unfortunately be overcome.

[141] (P79.S4)
There are seven ways of the Fencing within the Sword, from outside, from above, and from below the hand, going to assault, waiting, to be engaged, or both moving, one against the other; To gain the enemy, in all the aforementioned ways, the strike must be well delivered, long, strong, and in a straight line, so that the forte of the Sword covers all the vital points.

[142] (P79.S5)
Whatever is the most secure and most approved, it can be determined as such; all are good when they are well understood and executed with swiftness and judgment, needing to be regulated according to the Guard and the Openings that are made, and the nature of the enemy, whether fearful, bold, weak, strong, trained, or ignorant.

[143] (P79.S6)
The discoveries show where one should strike, from outside, from inside, from below, or from above, and the nature and quality of the enemy, and they teach whether we should attack or wait. The First, Second, and Third Guards typically strike from outside, the Fourth from inside, and the mixed one I proposed strikes from both outside and inside. Therefore, I consider it the best of all, of which I leave the judgment to the practitioners of the Art of Fencing.

[144] (P79.S7)
The strikes with which one wounds are primarily of two kinds, thrusts and cuts.

[145] (P79.S8)
The Cut is divided into several kinds, and above all into straight and reverse, which, being delivered by the right hand, is called reverse; right hand, reverse hand, and underhand.

[146] (P79.S9)
The Mandritto that has as its mark the middle of the head is called Fendente; if it is aimed at the left shoulder, it is called Mandritto oblique; if it is aimed at the middle of the waist, it is called Mandritto round.

[147] (P79.S10)
The Rivercio, which also has as its mark the middle of the head, is called the descending Rivercio.

[148] (P79.S11)
If the right shoulder is turned obliquely, if the middle of the waist is turned round.

[149] (P79.S12)
Both the Dritto and the Rivercio become false when they change their terms, with the Dritto ascending and ending on the right side, and the Rivercio on the left.

[150] (P79.S13)
The Underhand is divided into the Rising, which are strikes that move contrary to the Cuts.

[151] (P79.S14)
All fencers commonly believe that thrusting is far better than cutting; I do not remain entirely satisfied. The cuts of a short, wide sword, wielded by a strong arm, should be feared just as much as thrusts. Therefore, in addition to the reasoning of others, it seems to me that other considerations should be added, which demonstrate with greater foundation their difference.

[152] (P79.S15)
Firstly, the part of the Sword, which in the cut inflicts the wound, is greater without comparison than the point, and therefore it meets greater resistance, and it can more easily be found with the defense.

[153] (P79.S16)
Moreover, the thrust is more deadly because it requires less space to reach the vital parts, which is not the case with the cut, which is further hindered by the hardness of the bones. By forming a long line to gain strength in striking, it becomes predictable and consequently avoided, and finally, it tires the arm due to the motion it demands, wasting a great part of the life that serves the enemy as a target to run the thrust over a short distance, and with a more natural motion. Nevertheless, in duels, the cut is not subject to as many exceptions; however, I still cannot approve of the Iron Head, which places it above the thrust, and its reasoning for being delivered by the feet of others, and the inability to measure with the art is of no moment, because at the distance I can reach, the enemy with a cut can also reach me with a thrust, and thus it remains in its vigor as I have argued in favor of the thrusts.

[154] (P80.S0)
[ 61 ] HOW ONE SHOULD PROCEED, with the Timid, and the Reckless, with the Phlegmatic, and with the Choleric.

[155] (P80.S1)
CAP.

[156] (P80.S2)
XIX.

[157] (P80.S3)
To know the nature of the enemy is of such great advantage that those who can and will make use of such prudence in combat can never remain anything but victors. It cannot be said how different the Timid and the Rash are from one another, and although both agree in this that they are, one and the other, flawed, they are nonetheless placed at extremes, from which one cannot stray far from strength. If we regulate ourselves against them without any distinction in attacking, we will give clear indication of having little knowledge and even less experience in Fencing, and we will learn to our detriment how important it is to have these precautions firmly in mind, which are valued by those who have discourse and spirit with such esteem.

[158] (P80.S4)
The Timid stands pale and wavering, for fear is an internal cold that robs strength from the instruments of our actions. His step is constrained, and he always retreats; with every movement, he rushes to defend himself and places himself in disorder.

[159] (P80.S5)
With these, one must make use of feints, work him with skill to increase his fear, press him, and put him in disobedience, but with the caution of not driving him to despair, for in such a case he may shift from one extreme to another and change his nature.

[160] (P80.S6)
The Reckless, all covered in blood, rushes in without regard for guard or measure, plunging to attack. With this, one must evade the first onslaughts, for they are dangerous to engage, and one may be overwhelmed by force. I consider it a wise strategy to wait, and with a cunning retreat at the moment when they come within measure, they will move to close in, giving you the opportunity to strike and meet them with a blow.

[161] (P80.S7)
The Phlegmatic stands with his natural face, without signs of alteration, well positioned in his guard, cautious in his movements; he does not rush to attack, he waits, and if he seems slow and restrained, it is all for the sake of prudence, not out of fear.

[162] (P80.S8)
These are the paragons of duels, and it is a dangerous trade to engage with such men, who, not having their reason disturbed by emotions, know how to put the teachings of the art into practice without being shaken by dangers. However, I believe that the true path we must take against them is to assault them with resolution, armed with sword, dagger, and other defensive weapons, and to strive to instill fear in them through boldness, to which this temperament has a slight inclination, not neglecting to do everything with good order and much consideration, due to the vigilance and cunning we assume in the enemy. I praise the act of disturbing them with calls, and by beginning to bring them into obedience; then it is necessary to take advantage of the moment and not abandon it. And if they cannot be disordered in any way, one should observe the point of entering into measure, and at that instant, in the open or less guarded area that is closest, the wound will be delivered.

[163] (P80.S9)
The Choleric is thus opposed to the Phlegmatic, just as the Timid is to the Rash, and having declared the nature of one and shown its signs, the nature of the other has also been largely demonstrated; the cold teaches us to know the hot, and so it is with other qualities that are contrary to one another; The Choleric, therefore, to follow my order, has troubled eyes, a flushed face, and in his movements is restless, and this arises from the heated blood, which stirs him; they have no patience to wait, and as if dominated by anger, this passion often, with the unbridled desire for revenge, disarranges them in their assault.

[164] (P80.S10)
To remain victorious against these foes, one must not meet them with fervor, but rather settle and establish oneself in a strong stance, and in the mixed guard that I have introduced. The strikes, whether thrusts or cuts, must be parried with the strong part of the blade, and responded to simultaneously without fear, nor disorder, neither with the body nor with the weapons, and one must avoid being thrown into confusion by the storm of blows. At such times, it is praiseworthy to withdraw to make them fall short, and to further irritate and disorganize them. I do not blame the reproaches of words, and when the fury begins to wane, it is fitting to press them and take advantage of the opportunity that presents itself. Observing the timing and correctness of the measure, one may strike and save oneself with a retreat of two steps, and immediately return to the enemy's sword to safeguard against any attempts that might be made in such a state.

[165] (P81.S0)
[ 65 ] OF THE ADVANTAGES, between the Strong and the Weak.

[166] (P81.S1)
CAP.

[167] (P81.S2)
XX.

[168] (P81.S3)
Strength is a gift of nature, and it is such a gift that he who is stronger than another is naturally his superior. This inequality among men is corrected by art, in which we often see that strength is surpassed by reason.

[169] (P81.S4)
The weak man who finds himself in a duel against a stronger enemy must perfectly cover himself in his guard, and in the movement he makes to find the measure and strike, he must rely on his judgment. To prevent the stronger man from seizing his sword, he must move deftly with his hand, using the point to evade the blade. For this, the half-cavations serve remarkably well, carrying the sword beneath the enemy's weapon or under the dagger when we have such arms for defense. It is necessary to act out of measure to have it in this manner free and swift. If the strong man begins to unleash blows, it is not a safe option for the weak man to defend himself with the sword when it is not accompanied, but rather to evade with life-saving movements and by retreating slightly while always keeping the point forward. Sometimes he may even lean forward, and if the strong man wishes to approach to find it, he takes the time, and by thrusting, he finishes, or even without thrusting at the moment he moves, he can strike by extending the blow with great speed. This will happen easily because at the very moment the foot is in the air, it is impossible to walk and strike, and thus he will quickly retreat, evading all dangers of coming to grips, for in such a case there would be no option. From this, he can better secure himself while being armed with a dagger, being careful to keep wide, evading the advances, and maintaining himself tightly in his guard, for with these aids, he can counterbalance the disadvantage of strength.

[170] (P81.S5)
For the part of the Strong, it is not much to teach him, for given the rarity of the art, he is superior in himself; however, to avoid being partial, I shall say that he must with all diligence find the Sword, and once found, grip it in such a way that it cannot be freed unless it is drawn out, and thus having gained the measure, he can deliver a free strike at the time of the drawing, and without this, still being in possession of presence, and the enemy's Sword out of its line. And if by chance the Weak, instead of drawing, wishes to break the measure and recover the Sword, then it is necessary to follow him, and upon reaching perfect measure, strike firmly while immediately returning to the acquisition of the Blade. And in this case, if the Weak were to parry, he can pass and come to grips, and with a Struggle and without, still for the advantage of strength, he can throw him to the ground and disarm him, which is understood with the mere Sword, for if they had the Dagger it would be recklessness, and both would be in manifest danger of remaining dead.

[171] (P82.S0)
[ 68 ] OF THE ADVANTAGE, between the Great and the Small.

[172] (P82.S1)
CAP.

[173] (P82.S2)
XXI.

[174] (P82.S3)
There is a great difference between men and men, and what can truly be said to be experienced, which accompanies it with the requisites of the art, are many good warnings for its nature, many for the nature of others, and such mastery in one is approved, that in another it is flawed. We see daily how frequent the disparity of people is in the greatness of the body, and it can easily happen to fight with one who is greatly inferior in stature. On this matter, wishing to show how one should be governed, I will begin with the Great, demonstrating his advantages.

[175] (P82.S4)
The length of the strike that we demonstrate, which is so necessary to acquire through practice, they have without doing any violence, and by merely extending the arm, they are safe from being harmed, and can, at that distance, which is outside the measure of the Small, strike and assail him with blows. Therefore, there is no need to struggle to gain the Sword by adhering to the precautions required to approach in order to reach the enemy, even though doing so would not deserve blame. But the Small is compelled to pass through the enemy's point in order to come within measure, which, wanting to attempt from a great convenience of being wounded, cannot avoid the blow by retreating, for the opponent is so superior with the length of the line, with which he can always reach him from a safe distance, and keep him continuously out of measure when he attempts to gain the edge of the Blade.

[176] (P82.S5)
In the encounter, one must render the Small inanimate because the Great are always late due to the weight and heaviness of their limbs, and because their spirits are disunited and fatigued in their movements. Furthermore, the larger body makes for a larger target, and when exposed, it is difficult to recover from a blow, which greatly benefits the enemy by allowing them to seize the moment and strike. However, the Small is gathered within itself; it has its forces united and easily covers all without making any exposure. In its actions, it is extremely swift, and therefore, unable to reach the enemy otherwise, it must go for the gain of the Sword and resolutely press it to achieve two benefits. The first is to penetrate inside the Sword and pass through; the second is to put the enemy in a position to strike, and at the same time gain the measure and counter-strike. Remaining in a position to thrust would be exceedingly perilous, as would keeping at a distance, for in this way the Great could take advantage of their size, and the Small could only hope to be struck.

[177] (P83.S0)
[ 71 ] WHETHER ONE SHOULD ATTACK, OR WAIT.

[178] (P83.S1)
CAP.

[179] (P83.S2)
XXII.

[180] (P83.S3)
The subject of this Chapter is most beautiful, worthy of being observed for the opposition of the Masters of Fencing, both ancient and modern, and because, when well understood, it serves as a certain warning to always emerge with advantage from combat.

[181] (P83.S4)
There are some, among others Alfonso Faloppia and Angelo Vizzano, who believe that it is better to wait than to attack; the foundations upon which their opinion rests are these: that the body is better protected in its stillness, as it is difficult to move and remain uncovered, that the stronger sword, and consequently superior to the enemy, is not subjected to the accidents that are very frequent in disastrous places full of stones and unevenness, for there is a great difference between the Academy and the streets and squares, where duels are usually held, as one can better understand the nature and the play of the enemy, and this, from the gesture, from the bearing of the body, from the guard, which cannot be investigated so easily from that which resolves to attack. To all these considerations, we can add that one takes the time to enter into measure and strikes, and that one can better anticipate the blows, and subsequently, either prevent or defend against them; all these considerations, and others similar, although they may seem true and worthy of embrace, I, however, hold a contrary opinion, and firmly believe that there is a great advantage in attacking, and the reasons that have led me to regard it thus, I shall condense into a brief summary, leaving long discourses to learned individuals, for our profession consists more in action than in words.

[182] (P83.S5)
I say therefore that one must attack because the attacker is stronger than the attacked, and it is more difficult to defend oneself against a strong opponent than against a weak one. For this reason, it is a greater sign of strength to endure than to assault, because one endures [73] a stronger opponent, and this is demonstrated by a living reason: the one who endures has the present danger, while the one who goes to attack imagines it as furious, and it takes greater strength to resist the present evil than the future. Moreover, the one who waits submits to the will and cunning of the attacker, and can thus appear troubled, disordered, and obedient to those who are capable of convincing every stubborn opponent. The gains of the sun and the earth are of great consequence; they are acquired through attacking, and from this side, it is presumed that the justice of the cause lies, for he who is right is never timid, and it is the custom of the timid to wait. Furthermore, to come more to the individual, there will be none who denies that they do not openly commit to defense, and thus expose themselves to the first blows. I ask who assures them of parrying a thrust delivered with the measure, vigor, and speed that is used in our times, and with all the requirements that have been invented and demonstrated by the art. We do not see every day in the schools those who practice parrying against the wall, with the dagger, and with the sword, who, although they are united with life and arms, and know where the thrust is to be delivered, nevertheless, when the striker is experienced, most of the time do not parry. Now, when it comes to duels where the place of the strike is not determined, and it is lawful to use all the arts, with feints, calls, and a thousand cunning tricks and maneuvers, one attempts to deceive the enemy. I always speak with all reverence, and I never intend to derogate from the fame of valiant men, but in this particular, it is my thought that they are greatly mistaken. Will there be anyone who denies that exposing life to the danger of the first blow, which can be delivered with all mastery, does not become a blameworthy resolution? And to further prove this truth, it will not be out of place to show that the reasons put forth in favor of those who wait are barely plausible, and in effect, either false or common to those who move to attack.

[183] (P83.S6)
The first reason is that the body is better covered; to this it is answered that the movement, which is made out of measure, is not harmful when it causes some exposure, which does not happen even to those who have a little experience, being able to advance and retreat well defended, and always on guard. Moreover, the attacker, upon reaching the moment of striking, must plant himself and seek the right time to deliver the blow, and not rush.

[184] (P83.S7)
As for the Sword, which in motion becomes weaker, this is true when one parries, which if it be difficult we have demonstrated above, and it is not necessary to repeat it, but it is also necessary to confess that it is much swifter, and when the point reaches that distance from the body, which is equal to the distance of the Sword, or another enemy weapon, it is irreparable.

[185] (P83.S8)
I do not speak of falling, for the step taken with skill and judgment is always secure.

[186] (P83.S9)
Regarding the topic that one might better understand the play, I say that it is quite the opposite, for what waits immediately reveals itself, either Timid or Phlegmatic, and the assailant can, with various deceits, cover his artifices and investigate the nature and intelligence of the enemy. Ultimately, he has no advantage in taking his time to enter into measure, for this is the aim of the assailant; nor can he evade blows by anticipating them. There are more paths open to strike, and all these can be attempted by the assailant, who is not constrained by the one who waits, having placed himself in subjection. Thus, I conclude that he is superior in strength because he attacks with cunning, for he experiments with all the precepts of the art by chance, for the cave, this should suffice regarding the proposed matter.

[187] (P84.S0)
[ 77 ] CONCLUSION OF THE First Part.

[188] (P84.S1)
CAP.

[189] (P84.S2)
XXIII.

[190] (P84.S3)
I have reached the end of the First Part, in which, with the greatest brevity and clarity that I could muster (a task in itself not a little difficult), I have gathered the principal documents and the reasons with which this art is formed. I must only remind you that more is achieved by one who discusses teaching and learning the strikes; therefore, not being satisfied with what I have presented in the preceding discourses, I will now turn to the demonstration with figures, in which one can more securely recognize what I have said. In this, I shall be perhaps so meticulous that I will not overlook anything necessary for the confirmation of my intent or to facilitate the acquisition, even if others were much more knowledgeable than I. I know very well what it means to arrange a heavy and slow body to dexterity and to awaken a mind naturally dormant. However, order plays a great part in this skill, and I intend to proceed in this exercise with that standard, which cannot be reproached by dispassionate souls.

[191] (P84.S4)
The purpose of the First Part of the Fencing.

