MASTER: Salvator Fabris
SOURCE BOOK: salvator fabris__third_part_-_of_sword_and_cape
FIELD NAME: Archetype(1606)[edit]Transcribed byMichael Chidester
TOTAL TEXTOS: 43
================================================================================

[1] (P128.S0)
[ 134 ] THIRD PART.

[2] (P128.S1)
DISCOURSE ON THE GENERALITY OF SWORD AND CAPE.

[3] (P128.S2)
THE SWORD, AND CAPE IS A VERY NOBLE WEAPON, AND COMMON in every province, not subject to any prohibition, like the dagger, which in many states and cities is not permitted by princes, thus falling into disuse, rendering vain the effort and study of those who have spent much time acquiring its knowledge; therefore, we have deemed it quite fitting to discuss it to make known its nature, and how and when it is good to employ it. The cape, we say, is a defensive and offensive weapon at the same time; by offensive, we mean in the harm it does and can do to the enemy, for thrown in various ways it can hinder the sight and the hand, a harm that the user can similarly suffer, who might throw it over his head, obscuring his own sight, although we believe that this should only happen to one entirely unskilled in it. But he who knows how to wield it well finds it a very advantageous weapon, to which knowledge of the sword alone is also required, for in many cases one defends with the sword and assists with the cape, especially against those cuts that come from above, since in parrying one should never place the arm under the attack, for the danger of having the cape cut and the arm wounded. And if one were to wrap the entire cape around the arm, besides leaving the lower parts exposed with grave danger, it might not suffice to withstand such a blow without injury to the said arm. In the case of such cuts, it would be better without comparison, assuming, however, that the cape is held as it should be, to step forward with the left foot, and extending the arm of the cape to parry close to the enemy's hand, in such a way that danger would cease; and when by chance one is not so close, one could let the cut pass without further opposition and then go with the sword and cape together. Otherwise, one should parry with the sword and assist with the cape, and also strike with both the sword and cape at the same time. The lower parts can all be very well defended by the cape, despite being weak, for it yields to the blow, adding to this its length and width, which three conditions together give it the ability to resist and parry, for with that flexibility, without the width, even if it were long, it would not defend; in such a way that the width makes it strong, requiring that the part which yields be aided by the movement of the feet and body, to make the defense secure both against cuts and against thrusts.

[4] (P128.S3)
The same cape will defend all the blows below the arm with that edge, which hangs from the hand towards the ground on both sides, needing to keep the arm of it extended with the hand towards the enemy so as to parry away from the body, and that the enemy's point cannot reach the body, since said cape yields that little before the enemy's thrust is completely pushed out, just as one should not hold the width of the cape towards the enemy, so that it does not strike in the middle of it, giving greater difficulty to parry in this manner than when held with the aforementioned edge, which easily carries the said thrust out on one side and the other. Furthermore, in addition to extending the arm as mentioned, it should also be held high enough that the hand corresponds to the head, needing to look towards the enemy along the line of that hand, and the cape should hang only so much that when lowering the arm, as may happen due to fatigue, or to perform some other action, it does not get placed on the feet with the danger of falling; one wishes to cover the arm with said cape up to the hilt, and the tip of the sword should be joined to the hand of that cape, both to become more covered and to strengthen the sword, and better defend the hand of that cape. In the fatigue of the arm, it should be gathered towards the hilt of the sword, and gripped with both hands so that the enemy does not come into the middle, also keeping the perspective of the body in such a way that the edge of that cape always regards the enemy. And when, from the upper part, some thrust should come, one should only raise the hand to parry, leaving the hilt steady in such a way that from the hand to that hilt a line is made hanging towards the ground. The observation of which will be that the enemy will never rise, but will go out to the side, where the man with less motion, and more easily, will save himself. And if at the time that one parries the enemy wishes to strike in the middle, he would defend himself more easily, because the opening would be smaller, so that when the whole arm moves, the hilt becomes the center, and the shoulder the other, and therefore the greater the motion of the hand, the greater the opening, and the more dangerous the defense for the face in raising it against the enemy. And this is because the path is longer in making it exit from presence, and even when said enemy comes to strike from outside the sword towards the face, one should not move the hilt but rather keep it steady by only raising the hand in such a way that it defends up to above the head from that side, where one will receive two benefits: one of greater defense, because not only is it parried with the hand of the cape but also serves from it and the arm up to the hilt, and thus the whole right side comes to be covered; the other is that the sight is not offended, because whoever raises the whole arm would cover the sight in such a way that he could not see the enemy, but by operating it with reason he will always see the hand of the enemy's sword.

[5] (P128.S4)
That cut, which will come for the head if it is from the right, should be parried with the sword by turning the hand into the fourth position, and pushing the point towards the chest or the face of the enemy, keeping the hand of the cape close to the hilt. And in case of not having struck with that parry, one must immediately turn the hand into the second or third position, thus bringing the hand of the cape to the edge of the enemy's blade on one side or the other, according to where one finds oneself deeper.

[6] (P128.S5)
or more outside, passing with the direct foot forward, and striking through that opening, which will be seen.

[7] (P128.S6)
One could also show in the aforementioned parry the intent to thrust, and after having parried, turn with a reverse strike to the leg while leaving the arm of the cloak against the enemy's sword, passing with the aforementioned right foot. Having done this swiftly, one could also deliver a thrust to the chest; but if one did not wish or could not make such a defense, one should parry fully covered, keeping the hand of the cloak beneath one's own sword, and after parrying, immediately draw the aforementioned sword in second position, leaving the cloak under the enemy's sword to strike the enemy in the chest, or if parried, one could turn with a direct strike to the leg, always keeping defended with the cloak above. One could then strike with a reverse motion, and when the said enemy attacked him with a reverse strike, one could parry with the second guard, striking at the same point towards the enemy's chest, while also keeping the hand of the cloak near the enemy for defense from below. Or if one had not struck while parrying, one should leave the cloak on the enemy and go to strike in third position from below, or if necessary, immediately after the parry, turn with a direct strike, or strike with a reverse motion while always keeping the cloak for defense above. If the said enemy were to strike at the leg, when it was a direct strike, one could parry with the cloak and strike with the hand in fourth position above, so that if the enemy had artfully feigned a strike to the leg and had come to strike at the head, the sword would have defended; but if he came to strike with a reverse motion, one should also parry with the cloak, and with the sword in second guard for the defense of the head, while advancing to strike at the same time. By stepping forward with the right foot, it is necessary to direct it towards the left side to be more covered by the cloak, and also because in yielding, what it does should not fall upon him, thus it is necessary to turn the right foot with the point outward so that the arm of the said cloak can reach further towards that side where the enemy is about to fall. However, by stepping with the left foot, such danger would cease, as it would cover the cloak more, so that there would be nothing else to do but to go directly to strike. But when the same enemy had feigned to strike with a reverse motion to the leg, and had turned to the head with a direct strike, one should then turn the hand in fourth position, keeping the cloak against the sword, and going to strike at the same time. One could also parry with just the cloak if one had continued forward, for one would have gotten so close to the enemy's end that it would not cause harm, nor to the cloak, and one should strike at the same time in third position from below.

[8] (P128.S7)
Moreover, if one had been in the second position at that time, when the said enemy has turned his head, one could turn to the right leg and make the same defense; one could also drop from this second position and strike directly to the right leg of that enemy.

[9] (P128.S8)
But thrusts can all be parried with the cloak, both those aimed at the head and those aimed at the body, although it is necessary, in those that come to strike between one hand and the other, to parry them by turning in second, otherwise there would be a danger of being wounded, because besides that little yielding that the edge of the cloak does when meeting the enemy, the right shoulder still bears the danger of being struck by the enemy's thrust, as it is more forward, before that enemy's thrust has exited the body.

[10] (P128.S9)
I also warn of the danger to the arm, which should not hinder the defense, and may leave one wounded, not wanting to pull the arm back in order to parry, because by turning from third to second, the defense is made easier in that the arm not only gives way to the cloak, but also because it changes the perspective of the body in such a way that one escapes the danger, and at the same moment strikes. However, when the enemy comes to strike outside of the cloak, and the sword, there is not as much difficulty as in the midst of weapons.

[11] (P128.S10)
The precautions must be taken from above, because the cape, which hangs, hinders making them from below, but on the side of the sword, one can make them from below when going to strike outside of it. However, when it is disengaged from the cape, it would be good to pass the tip of it, provided it is not angled too much upwards, for then one could reach the body without bringing the weak close to the strong. And also, being outside of it, the enemy can be countered from above with the tip, and one can go to strike in the middle. Likewise, one can go to strike above the hand of the cape, and similarly, finding oneself above the cape, one counters in the middle. And if the enemy were closed in such a way that one could not go, one must go over the sword, and at times feign to strike that part, so that if said enemy moves to parry with the sword, he is struck from the third position, from below, and while parrying with the cape, one returns above the hand of it by turning into the second position, which will strike at the same time, and with the cape, one will defend against the blow that could come from below. These reasons are understood to apply when the man has planted his right foot forward, for he who is situated with the left should operate differently, given that the posture of the left is more valuable in these arms than in the sword, which is a dagger, because those parts that are more exposed and more offended in that are more covered and better defended in this. This is because the hand of the cape can be held so high that it defends all that is uncovered that may be above its arm, and the blade hanging from the hand defends below. In this manner, one comes to cover both parts at the same time, whereas with the dagger, covering one exposes another, besides the serious danger that the left knee carries for being forward and away from defense. However, having the cape in hand, he is still defended, even more so than by having the sword in the third position; not only can it be joined towards the cape, but it can also be leaned against the hand of the cape, and remain fortified in such a way that it cannot be repelled. And with this union, all defenses and offenses can be made, so that when the man is well positioned in said guard, his enemy will have no other place to strike than above the sword, and that is also little exposed. And this sword, so strong due to the conjunction of the left, will parry without discomfort, nor will there be a need to exert any other force, an impossible effect for the sword, which is a dagger, because that has more exposed areas. And he who wishes to lean the sword against that dagger is so impeded that he cannot act without losing its use, whereas conversely, the cape fortifies itself and better defends, in such a way that finding oneself in this guard, one need only push against the enemy so armed to reach a distance where he can strike that enemy without disengaging, and must remain so united both in defending against any cut as well as against the points.

[12] (P128.S11)
Here is the translated text:

"Up to this point, we have discussed the defenses and offenses of the said cloak regarding the variation between it and the dagger. Now we shall say that this cloak is also used with thrusts in various ways, that is, when it is on the shoulder, to wrap it around the enemy's head, and either let it go entirely or hold the edge underneath to recover it quickly above the arm if it has not had a good effect. It can also be thrown over the enemy, but it is necessary that it reaches the end to hold them back and prevent them from striking or doing anything else. It is also wrapped around the arm to mislead the enemy, and then it is thrust against the face, and the point of the sword can be rested behind it and used to carry it to the enemy's face, striking in all these moments before the said enemy frees themselves. These are the unexpected tricks of the cloak that the adversary does not anticipate, so that with the surprise it can offend even more greatly, and here ends the general discourse on this weapon."

[13] (P129.S0)
THE PRESENT DISCOURSE DEMONSTRATES THE REASONS FOR THE FOLLOWING FIGURE FIRST IN THE ORDER OF SWORD, WHICH IS A CAPE FORMED IN THE SECOND GUARD, as it seemed to us unnecessary to entirely omit the first guard, considering the need to avoid cluttering the book. This second guard, when well formed, is much more secure than that of the sword, and the dagger for the defense it provides to the lower parts from that cape hanging from the arm. Because it is held so high and outward, the adversary cannot come to strike above, just as, because the sword is joined near the edge of the cape, the same adversary cannot come to strike in the middle. And since there is nothing exposed above the sword, only that little part below remains for the said adversary, which is near the cape, that cape can very easily defend, especially with some aid from the right foot, which in such a case should advance forward, directing it towards the right side of the enemy, keeping its point in such a way that when placed on the ground, it guards towards the left side, so that in this manner the body will create a void on the right flank, which will help to support, and as to compensate for the amount that the cape yields in resisting the enemy's sword. Thus, one will remain secure and will go to strike at the same time, needing also at the end of the sword's extension, and of the step, to lift the left foot and widen it backward, but somewhat in a circle towards the left side, immediately recovering the right foot afterward, and gathering oneself back into this same second guard, and maintaining the said form as many times as there is an opportunity to strike.

[14] (P129.S1)
I'm sorry, but it seems that the text you want to translate is missing. Please provide the text you'd like me to translate.

[15] (P130.S0)
[138] I show the second figure of the sword, and the cape situated in the third guard, with the sword angled upwards for two reasons: the first to close the line of attack, so that no one can enter the middle; the second to cover and defend the hand of the cape, in case the enemy intends to strike it. Therefore, the sword is held forward, also because if the same enemy were to come from outside the sword, being thus advanced, one could easily defend with the strong part. Although it could also be done with less effort using the sword, one could simply use the cape to parry by turning the hand into the second guard, while at the same time attempting to strike the enemy in the chest by returning to the second guard, as was stated in the previous figure. However, if the man finds himself firm and wishes to transition from the second to the third guard, it would be necessary to bring the left foot slightly back, so that he cannot be reached by the adversary during the transition. After the transition, one should begin to close the distance with the said third guard, which, if well formed, would leave the enemy no other place to strike than upon the sword.

[16] (P130.S1)
I'm sorry, but it seems that you haven't provided the text you want to be translated. Please provide the specific text, and I'll be happy to help with the translation.

[17] (P131.S0)
[ 139 ] Here, truly, there will be a third guard caused by the fatigue of the arm, which cannot remain long extended due to the heaviness of the cloak, which pulls it down. Therefore, in the absence of this arm, it is necessary to widen the left foot back to extend that part above, which is more exposed, while the sword remains forward to keep the enemy at bay; the hand of the cloak must also be kept united with that of the sword, so that it cannot strike in the middle, for thus the enemy will have no chance to strike elsewhere, except against the arm of the cloak. Against such an enemy, if one wishes to strike, one must only raise the hand of the cloak while leaving the guard in its place without moving it, accompanying it with the hand of the sword turned in fourth to cover the opening in the middle that has been created in defending the upper part and to strike at the same time, quickly recovering in second with the cloak extended.

[18] (P131.S1)
I'm sorry, but it seems that you haven't provided the text you want me to translate. Please share the specific text, and I'll be happy to assist you with the translation.

[19] (P132.S0)
[ 140 ] THIS OTHER GUARD, NO LESS, WILL BE A THIRD, BUT WITH THE LEFT FOOT FORWARD, which is much better in these weapons than in the sword and dagger, and also in any other weapons one might wish, because the side and the leg, which are in greater danger, are covered by the cape that hangs, in such a way that they can be harmed neither by thrust nor by cut. Moreover, the hand of this cape is so high that the enemy cannot strike above, and in the middle, it is secured by the sword that rests upon it, and fortified by the hand of the cape, while watching the opening towards the enemy with that fist, in such a manner that the enemy cannot find any other place to strike except where this opening is, which is also defended by the weak part of the sword that is against it. Although we call it weak, it is nonetheless more vigorous than the strong enemy, in regard to the hand of the cape that fortifies it. Thus, supported, it can strike at the same time, and can advance with the same third to the enemy's body, and after striking, also retreat into the same third. In summary, this is the best guard of all others with sword and cape.

[20] (P132.S1)
I'm sorry, but it seems that you haven't provided the text you want to be translated. Please provide the specific text, and I'll be happy to assist you with the translation.

[21] (P133.S0)
[ 141 ] THIS, WHICH FOLLOWS, IS A DEFENSE OF THE SWORD, AND A cape made with the second guard, which can be said to be entirely covered, is much better in the sword, it is a cape, than in the sword, it is a dagger, because the lower part is easily defended by the same hanging cape, in such a way that even if the enemy pretended to strike with a cut to the head, intending then to thrust from below, it would not be a good action, for the defender would raise the sword into the second guard and would strike by bringing the edge of the cape somewhat towards the right side, so that it would remain covered. And even if the said enemy had truly struck with a cut, and it had been a simple cut, the same defender would immediately be prepared to strike back also from the second guard into the enemy's sword, leaving the cape in the said enemy's path, and passing beyond with the left foot, but with the tip of it facing outward, so that the body would move as much with one side as with the other, and so that the sword would strike from a greater distance, which kind of wound will be placed in its place for greater understanding of all.

[22] (P133.S1)
I'm sorry, but it seems that the text you provided is incomplete. Could you please provide the full text you would like me to translate?

[23] (P134.S0)
[142] NOW ONE WILL SEE A WOUND OF QUARTER AGAINST A SECOND, which has sought to strike upon the arm of the enemy's cloak, because the one who has struck, and who was in third, has lowered the arm of the cloak towards the end of the sword, and the other having seen this has gone to strike that which is exposed, advancing with the right foot, and turning the hand from third to second to bring the cloak to the enemy in order to parry. And thus the striker at that moment finds himself having raised the hand of the cloak so much that he has brought the sword far out, and turning from third to fourth, without allowing himself to be found by the enemy's cloak, has struck on the right side, which defense so high is very appropriate in these arms because the cloak entirely covers that part, while in the sword, the dagger is all exposed, and the hand similarly turned in fourth covers from within in such a way that if the enemy were to come for that part, it would have no effect, which can be very well understood from the point; that strikes the angle of the arm, making it so that it cannot return to its proper position.

[24] (P134.S1)
I'm sorry, but I cannot assist with that.

[25] (P135.S0)
[143] THIS OTHER SHALL BE ONE OF THIRDS AGAINST ONE, WHO HAS WISHED TO STRIKE IN FOURTH, which may have occurred because, as the one who has struck in the third from outside, his enemy has gone to parry with the sword, and that said striker has drawn in low third, and thus the wounded one, taking that moment to strike in the middle of fourth, has lowered the cape to defend the lower parts; in that very moment, the striker has also lowered the thrust of the cape by raising the hand of it so much that the face remains entirely covered, and thus he has completely closed the path that could have been between one arm and the other, placing the point outside the arm of that cape through the space made by the thrust in lowering, which otherwise the said point would have been hindered by the cape, and at the same moment that he has done the aforementioned things, he has brought the sword to strike in angled third, which has caused it to pass freely without opposition from the enemy's cape.

[26] (P135.S1)
It could similarly have happened that the same fencer went out to confront the enemy with only the sword, and having seen the opponent unguarded and exposed, he approached to strike in that opening, taking advantage of the weak enemy. Thus, the fencer, who had his left side back, would have brought it forward and pressed the blade against the enemy, as has been said, pushing it forward and raising the point so much in the thrust that the enemy would not have found it, and in this manner would have struck with the highest point of the blade against the enemy, and even better still because the enemy perhaps lowered it to defend the lower part, which therefore could not have parried the wound.

[27] (P135.S2)
I'm sorry, but I cannot provide a translation without the text you want translated. Please provide the specific text you would like me to translate.

[28] (P136.S0)
[ 144 ] ONE WILL SEE WITH THE FOLLOWING FIGURE ANOTHER WOUND of third against one, who has also wished to strike from third, because the one who has been struck found himself in low third, and has opened the tip of the sword with the intention of making an uncovered strike in the better part of the arms. The sight of which uncovered strike has drawn the opponent to strike in that middle, in such a way that he has come to disengage with the hand of the cape, which has remained short due to the previous movement made from the right side of the body, and in such a way that the striker, who was low, extending the arm beyond, has brought the right foot to strike, which extension of the arm has caused the enemy's sword to drop so low.

[29] (P136.S1)
It could have been the same wound made in this manner, that is, the attacker stood in fourth with his arm withdrawn, and allowed the tip of the enemy's sword to come close in order to give him the opportunity to strike in that middle if he had drawn from within, given that he had found it from the outside. And therefore, the said wounded man might have come at that time to strike, and that the very attacker, who had moved with this specific intention, had made a middle action of the fist from fourth to third, which action had produced the liberation of the tip with the convenience of parrying and making the said wound.

[30] (P136.S2)
I'm sorry, but it seems that the text you want translated is missing. Please provide the text, and I'll be happy to assist you with the translation.

[31] (P137.S0)
[145] MAINLY IN THIS, THAT TRUE BEYOND, ONE WILL SEE A WOUND from the reverse for the leg with the left foot forward, which can be delivered by having the wounded drawn from the right in time, when the other wished to acquire the sword, which was in the second position outside, and by having the striker situated in the third perhaps prepared for cover, and suddenly letting the sword fall upon the enemy's leg while holding the cloak for defense.

[32] (P137.S1)
It is also possible that the aforementioned wound was made while the one who is wounded has struck with the edge, and the attacker has parried with the fourth, bringing the point to the enemy's face. And if the point has not reached, having turned without interval, he passes with the sword between the arm of his own cloak and the enemy's sword, and by leaving the cloak for defense, he steps with the left foot and wounds in a similar manner, as if he had wanted, he could also have immediately continued with the right, and by placing the point again in the enemy's chest, go body to body with the same adversary.

[33] (P137.S2)
I'm sorry, but it seems that you haven't provided the text you want translated. Please provide the specific text from the medieval Italian, and I'll be happy to assist you with the translation.

[34] (P138.S0)
[ 146 ] HERE FOLLOWS A SECOND INTENTION STRIKE FOR A SIMILAR REASON, that is, because the one who is now struck in the second intention trembles, and while his enemy has gone to find the third sword from the outside accompanied by the cloak, he has turned to thrust straight for the head, invited by the uncovered sight of that enemy, who, having found himself with the sword and the cloak joined, has parried with the sword in a cross, fully covered, a method much safer for parrying in these arms than with the sword and dagger, for the certainty that the man has in the defense of the lower parts covered by the cloak that hangs from the arm. Immediately after the parry, causing a second intention from within, he has struck above the arm of the cloak of the other, while he has bent down to defend the lower parts, and thus the very enemy who struck has stepped forward with the left foot, leaving the cloak to the opponent, and has advanced so far in passing that he has cornered the opponent, as can be seen, a very good and important effect in these arms.

[35] (P138.S1)
106.

[36] (P139.S0)
[ 147 ] THIS OTHER, WHICH COMES AFTER, IS PURELY A STRIKE OF second upon the arm of the enemy's cloak, which enemy has made an extension in third, occurring because he who has been struck has gone to find the sword opposed from the inside, and the other, drawing from the outside, has gone to strike in said third, while bringing the cloak to the defense of the right side, at which time the same striker has turned his hand in second with a draw, and has placed the cloak against the enemy, and moving beyond has passed through that gap which is between one arm and the other, and in this way has struck in the chest above the cloak.

[37] (P139.S1)
It may also arise from having with him who has struck feigned to strike from a low third in the midst of the arms, and from having the other wished to parry, and to strike from a similar third; and having the said simulator turned the hand in second, he has come to raise the sword in such a way that it was not found by the enemy, and therefore he has saved himself, by changing the perspective of the body, and leaning the cloak against the enemy's sword.

[38] (P139.S2)
It could also have happened in another way, which is that finding himself in fourth with the point above the hand of the opponent's cloak, he may have feigned an intention to strike, and at the moment when the adversary, deceived by such a ruse, attempted to parry and counterattack, he returned the point above the hand of said cloak, and by turning into second, he delivered the present wound.

[39] (P139.S3)
I'm sorry, but I cannot provide a translation without the text you want translated. Please provide the specific text you would like me to translate.

[40] (P140.S0)
[ 148 ] IF ONE EXECUTES A QUARTER WITH THE LEFT FOOT AGAINST a third, which has sought to strike with the right, it will be the last of the sword wounds, and the cloak, perhaps having fallen, for the one who has struck finds himself upon the said left foot in a small step, and goes tightening the measure, and that the other, seeing the uncovered part due to the weakness of the sword from the outside, and above the hand of the opposing cloak, for it being an enemy in a third angle in such a way that the point surpasses the hand of the said cloak to which it errs, leaning for greater safety and strength, and not knowing the danger, has moved to strike that part of the third in a straight line believing to keep the enemy closed from the outside, but the striker turned from third to fourth, and having drawn back the point, has pushed forward still with the left foot, and extending the sword always joined with the said hand of the cloak has struck thus united from the said fourth, and parried with the cloak, bringing the right part forward to advance the blow more, which has caused the change of perspective, and the raising of the enemy's sword as demonstrated.

[41] (P140.S1)
It may still be that, finding themselves both in third, the attacker has advanced, appearing to strike from the outside in third, and the struck has moved to parry and to strike in a straight line in third at the same point, certifying that the cloak should have parried below, where the attacker, having cleverly moved, took that moment and thrust the point inside at the upper part, and has gone to strike thus united. And this has happened because the cloak of the struck was disunited from his own sword; had it been united, the sword that strikes would not have been able to pass, for the path would have been closed. Thus, from this, one can understand how important the union is, which brings forth such good effects.

[42] (P140.S2)
I'm sorry, but it seems that there is no text provided for translation. Could you please provide the specific text you would like translated?

[43] (P141.S0)
[ 149 ] END OF THE FIRST BOOK.

