MASTER: Antonio Manciolino
SOURCE BOOK: antonio manciolino__second_book_(sword_and_buckler)
FIELD NAME: TranscriptionbySteven Reich
TOTAL TEXTOS: 119
================================================================================

[1] (P100.S0)
[ 19v ] SECOND BOOK and S being in the upper book of the ten famous guards & the offenses, which can sufficiently be treated as originating from them, in this following I have deemed it appropriate with the diligence of three masterly games or assaults, which you may wish to call of sword & small broadsword, to provide instruction, and which should be all the more pleasing to the disciples, as the person, the legs, and the hands will render them lively and agile. Let no one be astonished, for I speak of the legs, because he who does not take pleasure in walking in the time and manner that we will teach him and have taught, can never achieve grace or victory from the game, truly, for as much as rich garments adorn the beautiful and most lovely Nymphs, who frolic on Mount Menalo or in the Lyceum, so much is the lightness of walking to the strikes of the radiant sword, which, when deprived of the tenacious steps, would bring such disgrace that, even though it were a serene night, if it were seen from the flashing stars: and how can victory be expected where gentle grace is lacking?

[2] (P100.S1)
Thus, we shall reasonably say that one has a wind, if by fortune he should win, and if from a rough rustic he should draw blows from the sides, he has not lost that which he ought to have done, for it is a more praiseworthy thing in the eyes of understanding men to lose graciously than to win by chance and outside of all grace. Just as in vile disgrace sometimes the fortunate event holds the place, so too does the desired victory always sit in the never excessive grace, for it is concluded that a gracious man can never lose, even if he were wounded by misfortune.

[3] (P100.S2)
But before we begin to speak of the purpose, we shall teach how to come to the play, so that not only the good players are made capable in offense and defense.

[4] (P100.S3)
But also in giving beautiful form to their strikes with graceful movements of the body.

[5] (P101.S0)
THE FIRST ASSAULT First, you will position yourself directly opposite your enemy at one end of the hall or in another spacious field, gracefully adjusting your stance over your legs, with the sword and the brocchero in your hands, in such a manner that every movement, every act, every gesture is full of grace.

[6] (P101.S1)
And wanting to come towards the Enemy, you will step with your right foot across towards your right side, and in such a step, you will deliver a false strike to the cap of the Brocchero, placing the sword in high guard; and the Brocchero must face towards you like a mirror. Subsequently, stepping forward with your left foot, you will touch the Brocchero, raising the sword in head guard while the Brocchero descends along your left thigh. And then you will run forward with your right foot, lifting the sword in high guard, and then stepping with your left foot, you will make an upward strike accompanied by a forehand to the upper arm.

[7] (P101.S2)
Then you will go with the sword in the high guard, and stepping forward with your right foot, you will touch the cap of the brocchero with the false edge and make an upward strike that rises into high guard, and afterwards you will embellish the play which is done by first throwing the right foot forward, then the left, and cutting the edge of the brocchero with a downward strike, so that after this the sword must drop, and immediately rise again from behind into high guard.

[8] (P101.S3)
And by drawing the left foot close to the right, you will then make a thrust with the brocchiere, and then with a great step, you will advance with the left foot, placing the sword in the high guard.

[9] (P101.S4)
Then with the right foot similarly forward, you will strike the cap of a false guard, and you will make an upward thrust in high guard, drawing the right foot along the left, so that the brocchero guards the head well, and thus up to this point, the manner in which you must come to find the enemy is contained.

[10] (P101.S5)
And do not forget, reader, such embellishment of the game, for in many places of the present assault we shall recall it without further mention.

[11] (P101.S6)
But when you are already near the enemy where the strikes will no longer be committed to the wind.

[12] (P101.S7)
You will step forward with your right foot in a great stride, striking him with a forehand to the face, which goes over the arm, and you will return in reverse, bringing the sword down in a tight long tail.

[13] (P101.S8)
Then you will make the good brocchero, a protector of the head, immediately returning from an upward strike that goes into high guard, where it is fitting that you draw your right foot along the left.

[14] (P101.S9)
And then, stepping with the right foot, you will deliver a downward strike to the face guard, and you will step with the left foot subsequently towards his right side, at which time you will deliver a descending thrust with a crosswise motion towards the iron gate.

[15] (P101.S10)
And at the head, you shall oppose the brocchero.

[16] (P101.S11)
Then, with your right foot taking a large step, you will make a false transverse strike to the enemy's face, so that the sword subsequently rests in high guard, delivering a downward strike to the head or to the face above the arm, and bringing your right foot back to the left, and then you will step forward again with your right foot, taking a large step, raising the hilt of the sword high and delivering a downward strike to the face, which goes under the arm.

[17] (P101.S12)
Then you will withdraw the right foot level with the left, making good the brocchero.

[18] (P101.S13)
And thus, advancing similarly with the right, you will make a false move to the face guard from two thrusts accompanied, so that the last one in the narrow iron gate has the finishing.

[19] (P101.S14)
And from here, by drawing the right foot to the left, you will make an upward strike in high guard, and having done this, you will embellish the play, as you have been instructed above.

[20] (P101.S15)
Then, stepping forward with the right, you will deliver a downward strike over the arm, and the right foot close to the left.

[21] (P101.S16)
Then you will return with the same right foot forward, making two reverses, one to the face and the other to the thigh, and letting go a thrust overhead, which goes over the arm, you will withdraw the right foot behind the left.

[22] (P101.S17)
Then you will thrust with the left, driving a reverse point into the enemy's face.

[23] (P101.S18)
Then with the right foot forward in a great step, you will strike with an upward reverse, and immediately turn with a false strike towards the left temple, and subsequently deliver a reverse thrust to the face from the right side.

[24] (P101.S19)
And suddenly I will throw the right foot back in a great step behind the left, and I will strike with a right thrust until I am in the guard position facing you.

[25] (P101.S20)
Then you will make a half turn of the hand so that the sword is in a high long tail position, performing the brocchero as a good fencer of the head.

[26] (P101.S21)
Then, you will draw your left foot close to the right, and subsequently step forward with the right, thrusting a point into the face of an opponent with a reverse strike to the thigh, and having done this, the sword should drop into a long, narrow guard.

[27] (P101.S22)
Then you will step forward with your left foot, thrusting a point towards the face, and after parrying with your right foot, you will deliver a downward strike to the head that falls into a narrow iron gate, defending your head well with the brocchiere. Subsequently, you will perform an upward strike, bringing the sword into high guard and drawing your right foot along the left, and here, in the manner already mentioned, you will embellish the play.

[28] (P101.S23)
And then you will strike with one hand straight over the arm with the right foot forward, having made the blow equal to the left, you will withdraw.

[29] (P101.S24)
Then you will pass [22r] with the same right foot forward, delivering a reverse thrust to the face, and immediately stepping with your left foot towards his right side, you will deliver a horizontal strike to the face; then, stepping forward with your right foot, you will deliver another horizontal strike also to the face, and subsequently a thrust in guard of the face from your brocchero accompanied.

[30] (P101.S25)
Then you will turn the third thrust for the head, which falls into the narrow iron door, and you will make an upward strike in high guard, bringing the right foot close to the left, and (as above) you will embellish the play.

[31] (P101.S26)
Having done this, you will make a half-sword grip, that is, you will step forward with your right foot in a great stride, delivering an upward strike from underneath the arm and then bringing the right foot level with the left. Subsequently, you will return to a great step forward with the right foot, making a false thrust across to guard your face.

[32] (P101.S27)
Then, similarly passing with the left, you will make a half turn of the fist accompanied by a thrust, which you must drive into his face, and afterwards you will step with the right foot towards his left side, making it seem as if you are delivering a straight strike to his left side. At that moment, the right leg should return back, pushing a reverse strike into his right temple, and then similarly withdrawing the left, you will strike the enemy with a half straight blow that goes into a guard position facing him.

[33] (P101.S28)
And following, you shall place your right foot alongside the left, positioning yourself in high guard, where you will render the play beautiful as previously mentioned.

[34] (P101.S29)
And thus, having completed the play with your adversary, you will make one step back [22v] no less beautiful than coming to the play done in the first part of the present assault, which you will do in such a way that, as you step back, bringing your right foot after the left, you will strike with a downward thrust under the arm; then, stepping back likewise with the left, you will make an upward strike from your weak side, so that the sword rises into high guard. You will then make another upward strike from your strong side, returning the sword to high guard and similarly bringing the right foot alongside the left.

[35] (P101.S30)
Then you will strike with a downward cut under the arm, retreating with your right foot, and then you will make a half turn of your body towards your right side; and in this turning, the sword must come out from under your arm, turning it once around the upper part of the head, so that the sword should find itself in the guard of the Unicorn, that is to say, with the hilt raised and the point facing the ground.

[36] (P101.S31)
Then, with a great step, I will place my left foot back, pushing a point from below upward into high guard, and drawing my right foot to be even with my left, and thus I will have returned to where you departed.

[37] (P102.S0)
THE SECOND ASSAULT.

[38] (P102.S1)
It must be clear from the reading of the aforementioned first assault that each of them is divided into three parts.

[39] (P102.S2)
The first has the manner of going to play.

[40] (P102.S3)
The second of playing.

[41] (P102.S4)
The third of the return from play, and as the second has offensive strikes, so the first, and the third have voids and playful maneuvers.

[42] (P102.S5)
Starting then the second assault from its first part, which is to engage in the play, I say that you shall similarly position yourself from one side of the hall as you did in your first graceful arrangement, and with the right foot you will lunge towards your right side, striking with the false edge at the cap of the brocchero, and raising the sword in high guard, so that the brocchero is turned towards the face like a mirror. And then you will step forward with a large stride using the left foot, making a great leap towards the enemy, during which time the sword must make a strong strike in the narrow iron door, and thus you will remain with your feet equal.

[43] (P102.S6)
Afterward, you will immediately advance with a great step with your right foot forward, making a rising motion into high guard, and here you will embellish the play not in the manner you did in the first assault, because each of these three assaults has its own embellishment, which we like to call so, and that for all the play in which one finds oneself again, is permitted to be retracted.

[44] (P102.S7)
To embellish then this second assault shall be, that by cutting with a descending strike at the edge of the brocchero, which falls into the iron guard, and at the same time pulling the right foot back, you will flee with the left foot behind the right, and together you will strike the cap of the brocchero.

[45] (P102.S8)
Then you will make a rising strike while in high guard, pulling the right foot level with the left.

[46] (P102.S9)
Then, wishing to already assail the enemy, you will lead with your left foot forward in a great step, thrusting a point in the act of an upward strike, which will go as far as the enemy's face, and immediately passing forward with your right foot in a great step, you will strike him with a reverse thrust to the face, doubling it with two downward strikes to the head, so that the last one lands in a narrow iron gate, and immediately you will make an upward strike in high guard, bringing your right foot next to your left, and then stepping forward with your right foot, you will strike with a straight thrust above the arm, similarly gathering your right foot next to your left.

[47] (P102.S10)
Then, advancing with the left foot forward, you will make a half winding to the face guard.

[48] (P102.S11)
And by making the semblance of another reverse, you will lead the right foot forward, giving it the appearance of striking him to the head with a downward cut, and in this guise, by stepping with the left foot, you will thrust a point into his face in the act of an upward strike.

[49] (P102.S12)
Then with the right foot forward, you will strike with a reverse from below upwards, and with a straight thrust going over the arm, and subsequently, by throwing the right behind the left, you will make a reverse with the hand of the sword, so that the brocchero serves as a good defender of the head, and that the sword is guarded in the long tail.

[50] (P102.S13)
Then, with your left foot forward, you will position yourself with the sword in the guard of the head, and then with your right, passing towards his left side, you will strike him with a downward cut to the head, during which time the left leg must follow the right from behind.

[51] (P102.S14)
Then you will make your sword recur in the narrow iron gate, proceeding in the guard of the face, and from here you will guide the left forward toward his left side, so that the right leg follows the left from behind, and having done this, you will strike him with a reverse to the face.

[52] (P102.S15)
After you deliver a thrust, gracefully leaping back, and from there [24r] stepping forward with your right, you will make an upward strike in high guard, and you will draw your right foot back to your left, which, once done, will embellish the play, in the manner described above.

[53] (P102.S16)
And resuming the play with the right foot forward, you will deliver a downward strike to the guard of the face, bringing the right foot level with the left, and then with the left foot forward, you will perform a horizontal strike to the head, and placing the right foot (continuing) forward, you will make a stance to deliver another horizontal strike, but thus you will wound the opposite leg with a thrust, so that the sword goes under the arm, and the buckler is in defense of the head.

[54] (P102.S17)
Then you will strike with a reverse from below upwards towards the enemy's hand, leaping back joyfully, so that after the executed leap, you find yourself with feet equal in a high long tail.

[55] (P102.S18)
Then with the right foot forward, you will make an upward strike into high guard.

[56] (P102.S19)
After executing a thrust with a wide iron door completely open, be mindful that if by chance the enemy wishes to strike your head, you will immediately thrust your left hand forward, and letting the sword fall back, you will catch the said blow with the brocchero, and you will respond with a false strike across the left temple in such a way that the sword goes under your arm.

[57] (P102.S20)
Subsequently, by placing the left foot behind the right, you will strike with a reverse blow descending in a long tail, so that the head is well guarded by the brocchero.

[58] (P102.S21)
Then, with the right foot back, you will withdraw the spinger and thrust a point at the face, and then returning forward with the same right foot, you will double two thrusts upon him, of which the last falls into the narrow iron gate, continuing with one mounted in high guard, and here you will embellish the play for the third time in the manner described above.

[59] (P102.S22)
After guarding with the right in front, you will cut a wide descending strike to the iron door.

[60] (P102.S23)
And you will do well to guard your head from the aforementioned brocchero.

[61] (P102.S24)
Then, stepping with the left foot beside the right, you will make a false strike from below upwards while in the guard of the face.

[62] (P102.S25)
And suddenly throwing the right forward, you will strike with a horizontal downward cut to the face, so that the sword falls into the iron guard.

[63] (P102.S26)
Then you will go with the sword in the high guard, and you will strike at his leg with an upward thrust under the arm, and immediately drawing your right foot back, you will wound his sword hand with a reverse strike, so that it falls into a long tail, and from there, advancing with your right foot, you will thrust a point into his face, and as he raises the sword to evade it, you will immediately place your dagger under it, and at that moment you will step with your left foot towards his right side, striking him with an upward thrust to the leg, and making sure that immediately after, your right foot follows behind the left, and subsequently, the left foot retreats behind the right in a large step, you will make a half turn of the hand, so that finally the sword is placed back in the long tail position.

[64] (P102.S27)
After you thrust a point at the face without moving your foot, and having done this, you will slide your left foot towards his right side, striking him with a reverse blow to his right temple, so that the right foot follows the left from behind, and that the head's guard is a good watcher.

[65] (P102.S28)
From here, you will thrust a strike into the enemy's face, lifting yourself backward with an agile leap, causing the sword to be drawn back high in a long tail.

[66] (P103.S0)
Then, stepping forward with the right foot, you will thrust another point into the face, feigning to strike him on the head with a descending blow, nevertheless, with a reverse strike across the right temple you will wound him, bringing the sword down in a long tail.

[67] (P103.S1)
Then you will strike with a false cross from the hand of the sword, which goes over the arm, and raising the hand of the sword in the air, you will strike him in the face with an advancing downward cut under the arm.

[68] (P103.S2)
Then, immediately drawing back your right foot, you will strike his sword hand with a reverse.

[69] (P103.S3)
Then, advancing with the right, you will thrust a point into his face, and feigning to strike him with a reverse to the face, you will deliver a forehand blow across the left temple, bringing the sword into a narrow iron gate where you will effectively evade the head with the buckler.

[70] (P103.S4)
Then, withdrawing your right foot back, you will make a half turn of the fist, bringing the sword into a tight long guard, and here, cutting towards the enemy's hand with a descending half strike without moving your feet, you will subsequently step forward with your right foot, and thrust him in the face with a point, doubling two downward strikes to the head, and making the thrust good, and then you will make an upward strike into high guard, drawing your right foot back to be level with the left.

[71] (P103.S5)
Thus you will embellish the play in the manner already mentioned three times above.

[72] (P104.S0)
Then, making a half-sword grip, which is done by pulling a tramazzone that falls into a wide iron gate, you will immediately guide your left foot forward, pushing a point into his face from the right side. And as he lifts to avoid that point, you, taking the inside of his sword with your left hand, will strike him with a downward blow to the head, or wherever seems best to you, and thus you will have satisfactorily finished the play.

[73] (P104.S1)
But wanting to return to the game with grace, you, moving with your back turned, will throw your right foot back in such a manner, striking a straight thrust under the arm.

[74] (P104.S2)
Then, withdrawing equally backward with the left, you will make one rising strike from your left side, and another from your right, in which the sword goes into high guard.

[75] (P104.S3)
Then, by throwing the right foot back once more, you will deliver a straight thrust under the arm.

[76] (P104.S4)
Then, turning the person over the firm feet towards your right side, you will strike with a reverse, so that the sword turns over the head, bringing it into the guard of the unicorn, of which has been spoken above.

[77] (P104.S5)
Subsequently, by throwing the weak behind, you will thrust a point, which goes into high guard, drawing the right foot back to the weak, and thus you will have returned to the first place from where you set out to engage in play.

[78] (P105.S0)
THE THIRD ASSAULT.

[79] (P105.S1)
In no other way than as mentioned above in the two preceding assaults, finding yourself with every noble manner at the head of the hall and wishing to attack your enemy, you will step with your right foot across, and towards your right side, making a moulinet, that is, a turning motion outside of the arm with the sword, and then similarly stepping with the left, you will make a reverse from below upwards, so that it goes above the arm.

[80] (P105.S2)
Then, advancing with the right foot, you shall deliver two reverses, such that at the end of the last one, the sword shall be in high guard.

[81] (P105.S3)
Then you will see the left hand forward, making a touch of the brocchero and bringing the sword into the guard of the head.

[82] (P105.S4)
Thus similarly with the right foot forward, you will make an upward thrust in the act of pointing, which will return to high guard, and in such a moment you will withdraw the right foot behind the left, and having done this, you will embellish the play not in any of the two aforementioned ways, which it is already clear above that each assault has a separate embellishment. And this is so, that you will cut with a descending strike the edge of the brocchero while pulling the right foot back at that time, and making the sword descend and subsequently rise into high guard, where you will make another moulinet behind the head with the hilt of the hand, that is, a turning in the manner of a circular turn, and then you will pull the left foot behind the right, striking the brocchero with a good blow.

[83] (P105.S5)
Then you will thrust the left forward, positioning yourself in the head guard, and with the right you will make an upward strike in the thrusting action, lowering the sword into the high guard, and at this time you will draw the right foot close to the left.

[84] (P106.S0)
And wishing today to come to grips with the enemy, you will step forward with your right foot, delivering a straight thrust to the arm, simultaneously bringing the right foot next to the left, and immediately returning the said right foot forward, you will make a half reverse to face guard, and then you will strike down with a cut to the head accompanied by two thrusts, making the last one fall into a narrow iron gate, and here the watchman must guard against the head.

[85] (P106.S1)
Then you will deliver an upward strike in high guard, gathering your right foot by the left and (while shifting) you will step forward with the right, and you will deliver a half downward strike to the face guard, and subsequently you will strike him in the head with two horizontal strikes, of which the last will be a feint, that is, you will make a show of striking him with a horizontal blow, and thus you will strike him with a downward blow to the leg, lowering the sword in a wide iron door, and then you will raise a false strike to the face guard, and then by withdrawing the right foot back, you will settle into a high long tail guard. Having done this, you will bring the left foot close to the right, and then you will advance with the same foot, thrusting a point to the face, and then feigning to strike him on the head with a horizontal blow, you will strike the thigh with a reverse, pushing a thrust to the face followed by a downward horizontal strike in a narrow iron door, ensuring that the brocchero defends the head well, and subsequently pulling the right foot close to the left, you will make an upward strike in high guard, and here you will embellish the play in the manner previously mentioned.

[86] (P106.S2)
Then, seeing ahead the right foot, I will follow it with the left in a similar step, thrusting a point upward into the enemy's face, and soon afterward, placing the right foot in front of the left, with a double reverse from below to above, you will strike him on the arms.

[87] (P106.S3)
Then you will strike with a downward cut to the head, which will fall into a narrow iron gate, and then, stepping forward with the left foot, you will thrust a clever point into his face, and while he raises his weapon to evade, you will wound the opposite thigh with a reverse strike, keeping the sword in the guard of the head, and stepping back with the left foot, you will strike his sword hand with a descending half cut into a wide iron gate.

[88] (P106.S4)
Then, by pretending to strike his sword with your false, while he aims to evade, you will thrust your sword beneath his into his face, and as he seeks to defend himself from that point, you will immediately wound his right thigh with a reverse.

[89] (P106.S5)
Then, for your safety, you will strike his sword hand with a false strike followed by a downward strike to the face, so that he falls into a wide iron gate.

[90] (P106.S6)
Then in the same hand of the sword, you will thrust a point in such a way that your sword hand is covered by that of the broccher.

[91] (P106.S7)
And then you will immediately double the two thrusts to the head, and making an upward strike in high guard, you will bring your right foot in line with the left, and you will embellish the play in the manner described above.

[92] (P106.S8)
Then, after sliding with the left foot sideways and striking with a forehand as if to fall, you will swiftly guide the right foot forward, placing the false edge under his sword.

[93] (P106.S9)
Next, stepping forward with the left foot, you will make a turn of the hand, pushing a thrust to the face, and then taking a large step forward with the right, you will double up with two downward strikes to the head, of which the last must go to the narrow iron gate, so that the Brocchero watches the head well. Then you will make an upward strike in high guard, withdrawing the right foot to be level with the left. And stepping forward with the right, you will deliver a straight thrust to the leg, which goes under the arm, similarly angling with the left towards his right side, you will strike him with a reverse to the face.

[94] (P106.S10)
And then you will lower the sword in a long tail, allowing the right leg to go behind the left.

[95] (P106.S11)
Then you will step forward with your right foot, pulling a false strike from below upwards into a guard position facing him, and suddenly feigning to strike him with a reverse blow to the right temple, you will strike his leg, which will be in front of you with a descending forehand under the arm, so that the brocchero guards his head well.

[96] (P106.S12)
And subsequently, you will place the right foot beside the left, and, advancing the right foot, you will strike with a reverse to the face, which will fall into a long, narrow tail, and then making an upward thrust into high guard, you will place the right foot beside the left, embellishing the play as previously described.

[97] (P106.S13)
Then you will step forward with your right foot, striking him with a descending blow to the arm in such a way that your right shoulder is positioned with the point towards the chest of your enemy.

[98] (P106.S14)
Then, striking him with a reverse in the manner of a downward cut that lands in a narrow long tail, you will wound his sword hand with a false return over the arm, and subsequently, raising the hand of the sword into high guard, you will strike him with a straight thrust under the arm, bringing the right foot close to the left, and immediately shifting the right foot towards his right side, you will wound him with a false advancing strike to the face guard. Then, guiding the left foot forward, you will feign to strike him with a reverse to the right temple, and then quickly advancing with the right foot towards his left side, you will deliver a downward cut to the face that lands in a wide iron gate, so that the right leg follows behind the left, and here make sure that the brocchero guards the head well.

[99] (P106.S15)
Then, withdrawing the left foot close to the right, you will thrust a feint up to the guard of the face, and subsequently, stepping forward with the right foot, you will bring the sword into high guard, and at once you will strike the head with a downward cut from two thrusts to the face followed, and while the brocchero defends the head well, you will then make an upward strike in high guard, drawing the right foot alongside the left.

[100] (P106.S16)
Thus, advancing with the right foot, you will strike him with a downward cut to the face guard; similarly, with the left foot, but toward his right side, you will deliver a descending thrust into the iron guard of his waist, and from here you will pass with the right foot, feigning to strike him with a downward thrust to the head; nonetheless, you will wound him in the leg with a forehand strike that goes under the arm.

[101] (P106.S17)
Then, by stepping back with your right foot, you will strike his sword hand with a reverse blow, ensuring that the head is well protected from the thrust.

[102] (P106.S18)
Then, advancing forward with the right, you will make a false move to the face guard, and then, suddenly feigning to strike him with a forehand, you will hit him with a reverse while stepping forward with the left foot.

[103] (P106.S19)
Then you will withdraw your left foot back, simultaneously delivering a right thrust that goes straight into the guard of the face, and by subsequently throwing your right foot back, you will make a turn of the hand, positioning yourself in high long tail guard. Then, bringing your left foot closer to the right, you will step forward with your right foot, thrusting a point at the face followed by a downward strike that does not break the guard of the face.

[104] (P106.S20)
Then, immediately going into the head guard, you will strike him with a forehand, aiming under the arm while bringing your right foot next to the left.

[105] (P106.S21)
Then, stepping forward with your left foot towards the enemy's right side, you will strike with a false strike from below upwards, bringing it into a guard position facing him. Subsequently, by bending with your right arm forward, you will raise your sword into a high guard, delivering a downward cut to the head, ensuring it lands in a narrow iron gate, so that the brocchero serves as a good defender of the head.

[106] (P106.S22)
Then you will make an upward thrust in high guard, withdrawing the right foot behind the left, and embellishing the play, as has been said above.

[107] (P106.S23)
Then, guiding forward the right foot, you will strike him with a finishing straight blow over the arm, and having done this, you will step with the left foot towards his right side, turning the dagger over the hand, and moving with the sword in a hanging guard, and immediately stepping forward with the right foot, you will strike a false strike against the enemy's sword, which is in high guard, and then quickly delivering a straight strike to the leg, which goes under the arm, you will make the dagger guard well the head, and then, stepping back with the right foot, you will wound the hand of the sword with a reverse strike, so that it falls in a wide long tail.

[108] (P106.S24)
Then, stepping with the left foot beside the right, you will advance with the right, thrusting a point into the face.

[109] (P106.S25)
Then, passing with the left towards your right side, you will make it seem as if you are delivering a thrust; all the while, you will pass with the right towards his left side, striking him with a descending blow to the face in such a manner that the sword falls in a wide iron gate, the left foot following the right from behind.

[110] (P106.S26)
Then, withdrawing the left foot behind the right, you will make a false guard in the face while advancing, accompanying it with the brocchero. Then, immediately stepping forward with the right foot, you will strike with a reverse to the face that lands in a tight long tail, and you will ensure that the brocchero defends the head well.

[111] (P106.S27)
Then, advancing with the left, you will thrust a point into his face, and making a similar action with the right, you will deliver two downward strikes to the head, of which the last one will fall into a narrow iron gate, and subsequently, you will make an upward strike in high guard, bringing the right foot close to the left, and embellishing the play in the manner already described.

[112] (P106.S28)
Therefore, you will make a half-sword grip, that is, you will step forward with the right without moving the sword or the buckler, and then you will advance with a great step with the left foot, thrusting at him with a point that goes in the action of an upward strike to the guard of the face.

[113] (P106.S29)
Then, striking with the right hand forward, you will make the appearance of striking him in the head with a downward cut, also giving him that across the legs; then you will make yourself small under your sword, going into a guard facing him, and you will protect yourself from the enemy with the pommel.

[114] (P106.S30)
Then, advancing with the left foot towards his right side, you will strike him with a reverse blow to the right temple, in such a way that the right foot follows the left from behind, and that the head is well guarded from the sword.

[115] (P106.S31)
Then, after delivering a thrust to the face, you will withdraw with a jump backward, so that the sword remains in a high long guard.

[116] (P106.S32)
Then, with the right foot advanced, you will make an upward strike, which goes into high guard, and by withdrawing the right foot next to the left, you will have completed the play.

[117] (P107.S0)
Then, wanting to return with the sword to the place from which you first departed, while moving as before with your back behind, you will throw your right foot back, delivering a straight thrust under the arm.

[118] (P107.S1)
Then similarly, withdrawing the left in this second step, you will make an upward strike towards your left side, which goes into high guard, and immediately you will make another upward strike towards your right side, gathering the right foot next to the left, and then the same right foot back, you will deliver a straight thrust under the arm, and bringing the left to be equal with the right, you will lead the sword across your chest and then over the arm of the opponent.

[119] (P108.S0)
Then, advancing with the left, you will make a little wheel outside the arm, so that the sword falls into a tight long tail, and then you will place your right foot comfortably so that its heel touches the tip of the left foot, raising at this time the sword in high guard with the brocchero well extended towards the enemy.

