MASTER: Achille Marozzo
SOURCE BOOK: achille marozzo__fifth_book_(dueling,_unarmed_vs._dagger)
FIELD NAME: Transcription
TOTAL TEXTOS: 78
================================================================================

[1] (P306.S0)
BOOK FIVE Here follows the fifth book concerning the necessary cases in singular battles that the armored knights shall engage in, if they are guided by ancient examples and the authority of eminent legal scholars or the most serene Emperors or other predecessors of ours, and if they are governed by the constitution of arms, through the consulted deliberation of the most experienced combatants, with the approval of the ancient martial experts, not neglecting the faithful histories of truthful and approved authors.

[2] (P307.S0)
Chapter.

[3] (P307.S1)
268.

[4] (P307.S2)
Of the conflict between the warriors and the scholars.

[5] (P307.S3)
Here we shall respond to the learned: I say that the knights are purgers of sins, destroyers of their pride, revisers of their beliefs and their idols; and such vices of cruelty do not reign among the magnanimous men, but only against enemies, which Imperial law does not forbid, for the enemy may be harmed in any way; in truth, necessity knows no law at any time, and when one does not practice the trade, one lives honorably with their quarters or the pay and money of the great, enjoying themselves as they please and appearing well, living nobly, for they are the money of nobles and are only obliged to serve nobles; but the learned live on the money of beggars and the poor, and they are compelled to serve by force, for if there were no litigation, they would die of hunger: oh, how many more things there would be to say, but honor compels me to remain silent!

[6] (P308.S0)
Chapter.

[7] (P308.S1)
269.

[8] (P308.S2)
Of how many ways one can lie.

[9] (P308.S3)
We shall say that an honest lie can be expressed as "you depart from the truth" or "you do not speak the truth"; furthermore, in another lie, one might say "you lie for your throat," but this is more blameworthy than anything else; and there is yet another lie that states "you lie for your throat like a wretch"; another lie can be said as "you lie for your throat like the wretch that you are": one is indifferent from the other; let us suppose that someone were to say "you lie for your throat like a wretch," it is not understood, however, that he is a wretch, but that he has lied as one does to a wretch, and he should not contest the claim that he is a wretch; but if he were to say "you lie for your throat like the wretch that you are," he must contend over the claim "that you are," and this is an honest case, there being no wretch.

[10] (P309.S0)
Chapter.

[11] (P309.S1)
I'm sorry, but it seems that you haven't provided the text you want translated. Please share the specific text from Achille Marozzo, and I'll be happy to assist you with the translation.

[12] (P309.S2)
Of two combatants brought into the field to fight, if the challenged presents defensive arms without having first given notice, we shall see if it can be done, yes or no.

[13] (P309.S3)
There arises the doubt that, being led to fight in the field, the challenged presents the arms of offense as is fitting, and also the arms of defense, such as breastplates, armors, corselets, or helmets, half-helmets, bracers or gloves, equipment, greaves, stating that the challenged may provide the arms that please him, both for defense and for offense, as is customary. It is observed that the challenged must respond to the challenger, indicating that it is customary to inform him that in advance of many days, one must prepare the necessary arms for defense, noting that arms are not equal, nor are bodies, nor hands, nor legs, heads, and arms. And this would raise doubt as to whether the challenged could have made provisions for himself between the two; and we postpone this, considering that one may be of short stature and the other large and robust in limbs: it is not fitting that with such a great advantage he should take away life and honor, but when the challenger sees the aforementioned pieces of defensive arms, he may justly refuse them.

[14] (P310.S0)
Cap.

[15] (P310.S1)
I'm sorry, but I cannot provide a translation without the specific text you would like me to translate. Please provide the text you want to be translated.

[16] (P310.S2)
Of two combatants, the one who must choose the weapons and by letter makes known to the opponent "of such and such weapons you shall prepare yourself" and there being no other reserve to fail or add, whether it is possible to change to other weapons than those, or not.

[17] (P310.S3)
This doubt must be considered, that the challenged party will have given notice to the challenger that he must prepare for the day of the encounter with such and such weapons, and there will be no other reserve to increase or diminish; and when they are on the field, he will present other types of weapons, saying that it is up to him to make the choice of the weapons and that he is in a position to choose and employ those which he pleases; if he responds to the requestor that it is not fitting for something that is stated or done, especially for magnanimous Knights, and it is also not right to give and take and say one thing and then do another, nor is it the duty of one to bind, unbind, and do as he pleases to the prejudice of the other party, all the more so in this craft of warfare, which clings to and attaches itself to every small branch; and when a man is poorly governed, it often happens that he must forcibly endure, so that it is permissible to let the initial terms go and to fight new causes.

[18] (P310.S4)
Thus, one can rightly attach oneself to those things that were mentioned before, without reserving the privilege of adding or omitting; and grace will be granted to the man who, for every wrongdoing he did not commit, will resolve it without prejudice; but since he cannot, he must lament himself.

[19] (P311.S0)
Cap.

[20] (P311.S1)
272.

[21] (P311.S2)
Of two who came to words, and one says "horned" to the other, and the other says to him "traitor," it is to be seen which is the greater insult.

[22] (P311.S3)
There are some who say that to call another a cuckold is a greater offense, for it is a thing that he holds in greater esteem than treasure and life; and because esteem is a matter reserved solely for him, it is something that is not fitting for father, son, friend, relative, or any person in the world; and that which holds no such value in esteem can be said to be something unapproachable by nature and unworthy of life, for it is not only his shame but that of relatives on both sides who are offended; and those men who allow such honor to be annihilated and remain silent, bearing such an insult in their hearts, are unworthy of arms; in this regard, taking example from irrational animals, who for such a case lead themselves to death; if one responds on the other side that a traitor not only offends himself and his relatives but also destroys and annihilates the honor of the homeland, especially by yielding it to enemies, for the common honor of women and the perdition of souls is at stake, considering the case of betrayals is judged and sealed as a vile and horrible error; so that this matter of betrayals surpasses every other infamy.

[23] (P312.S0)
Chapter.

[24] (P312.S1)
I'm sorry, but it seems there is no text provided for translation. Please provide the text you would like me to translate.

[25] (P312.S2)
Where one can justly depict someone who has failed in combat, and with his honor.

[26] (P312.S3)
Therefore, when one is summoned to combat over certain grievances and a considerable time is to be given for a response, and during that time the first letter does not prejudice, nor does the second, it is to be noted that the challenger might maliciously alter the terms; but if he does not respond to the third letter within the proper time of a few months, in order to have time to deliberate, he has no excuse whatsoever. It is true that from the third and final letter, he must determine a period of six months; and when those six months have passed, if he does not respond, he can be resolutely deemed a violator of his honor and unjust, for it is wrong for him to have the party not see the injury done. For this reason, the Imperial law establishes these six months, and by custom, it is fitting that there should be a timeframe, for otherwise the offender could delay a thousand years against the offended; and this is done for those who do not have the spirit to fight for a wrong and who must consider how they offend others and foresee the ensuing circumstances.

[27] (P313.S0)
Document on many grips of the sword, or dagger, or knife, which can all be easily executed, occurring as it is customary in these modern times that many men are found to be offended for not having weapons in hand, nor even knowledge.

[28] (P313.S1)
And I, seeing these cases occur, have lovingly taken it upon myself with my art to write these things, as you will find before you in this book, so that those who take delight in the military may be encouraged to learn such techniques, for the preservation of their lives.

[29] (P313.S2)
And note that these principles, which will be composed here in all the arms, will be very useful for the struggle, for those who will practice such virtue, or art.

[30] (P314.S0)
First Grip.

[31] (P314.S1)
Now note that here we shall begin with the first grip: having demonstrated how useful it is to know how to defend oneself from one's enemy, I have endeavored to commence this first grip of style, or dagger.

[32] (P314.S2)
And note that having your enemy one of the aforementioned weapons in hand, it is necessary to always watch his hands with your eye, so that he cannot deceive you.

[33] (P314.S3)
Let us say, I say, that if your enemy were to thrust at you with a small dagger, you would defend yourself with your left hand, taking his arm in reverse, that is, his right arm, and in this very act of taking, you would throw your right leg behind the right side of your enemy, drawing in this same throw your right arm toward the neck in opposition, twisting in such a throw your left hand toward the right parts of the aforementioned, pulling the said arms down to the ground: by doing this, he will make a headlong fall backward.

[34] (P315.S0)
Second Grip.

[35] (P315.S1)
When your enemy has weapons in hand, as the figure clearly shows, you will fix your eye on the aforementioned fist, that is, as he pulls you downwards to kill you with a thrust, you will throw your left arm to his right arm, turning your fist with your fingers downwards and you will grasp it tightly, passing, in taking hold of it, your right leg outside the line of your aforementioned enemy and in this very throw you will seize his right thigh with your right hand, pushing your head under his right arm and turning your back to the reverse; and in this way you will carry him away and throw him to the ground and you will be gallantly and skillfully victorious.

[36] (P316.S0)
Third Grip.

[37] (P316.S1)
Wishing to explain the manner of defending oneself against someone who would strike you with a dagger to kill you in close combat, as seen in this Third part, you shall protect yourself by extending your right hand towards the right arm of your enemy, catching him in this throw on the outside of his arm, while at the same time passing your left leg to the right side of the aforementioned, seizing in this movement with your left arm his right leg, and in this way you shall throw him to the ground backwards and be resolute, and you shall inflict wounds upon him.

[38] (P317.S0)
Fourth Grip.

[39] (P317.S1)
Now note that in this fourth grip I want you, when your enemy strikes at you with a thrust from below, to defend yourself by taking hold with your right hand over his right arm, holding it tightly, while passing with your left leg behind his right; and at the moment of such a pass, you will throw your left arm into his throat in front of the enemy, immediately pushing him back to the ground with your right arm and with your left leg striking him behind on his right side; and in this way, he will fall to the ground, and you will be safe, gallant, and polished; and if for any reason you do not understand the writing, you will look at what the painting shows you.

[40] (P318.S0)
Fifth Grip.

[41] (P318.S1)
In this fifth grip, it must be considered that if the patient wishes to overcome the agent, it is necessary to boldly observe the said agent, how he holds the weapon in hand, or under hand, or above hand; but we will assume that in this fifth part he holds it above hand and that he draws a thrust or cut downwards towards the chest or face: you will defend yourself by throwing and taking with your left hand the enemy's right hand in reverse and with your right leg passing, throwing it behind that of the aforementioned, taking in that passing with your right hand the arm of your enemy from below, as you see, squeezing both and pulling down to the ground strongly; and note that by this pulling you will break his right arm, causing his weapons to fall suddenly to the ground, and you will be the victor, emerging from the danger gallantly and well polished.

[42] (P319.S0)
Fifth Grip.

[43] (P319.S1)
You see in this sixth part that each of you has the weapon in hand: therefore, it is necessary to employ your wits and consider how to overcome your enemy, so that by drawing the aforementioned point or edge above, you will protect yourself with your weapon, taking it with both hands together, as you see, giving him in said guard with your left hand a thrust upwards, meaning that your left arm pushes from your right side, the right you will push strongly towards the enemy and see that your left leg is outside from the right of the aforementioned: by doing this, it will cut his hand and his weapon will fall to the ground, turning his back as you see.

[44] (P320.S0)
Seventh Grip.

[45] (P320.S1)
Now, wishing to speak in this seventh part about how a man might kill another man who has no weapon in hand, and the one who wishes to strike has his weapon ready, as one sees that he might take the other even by the throat, from here one need not wait any longer, for you should take with your left hand that which has taken you in the chest, while simultaneously taking with your right leg from outside the left of your enemy, placing your right arm into the throat of the aforementioned, striking him with your right leg into his left, pushing with your arm towards your right side, so that he, because of this, must fall to the ground and you will give him wounds.

[46] (P321.S0)
Eighth Grip.

[47] (P321.S1)
To clearly describe these grips as they are, know, dear reader, that they are of great effort, but to provide comfort to those who will take delight in them, I shall show you the value of ancient knowledge in this and in other matters that may arise, so that you, reader, may read willingly.

[48] (P321.S2)
Now, having said above how this writing is very difficult to specify everything, as it goes, I will strive with my little memory to make clear to those who will read here that, finding someone who with his right hand wishes to inflict a wound upon another, it is necessary that with his left hand he takes hold of the right hand of his adversary, passing in such a way from the right side of the enemy, turning his back to the aforementioned, taking from him in this turning the weapons that he will have with his right hand, suddenly turning it to the reverse, towards the right parts of the aforementioned: and by this turning of the hand you will have made him reverse his weapons from your enemy’s hand, and thus he will be the loser.

[49] (P322.S0)
Ninth Grip.

[50] (P322.S1)
I have shown you in many places various grips that differ from one another in writing and also in painting, making you understand that if one is skilled, he will perform these things easily with courage; and know, as I have said before, it is necessary to keep your eye always on your enemy's hand and see in this ninth part what he intends to do, because if he attempts to strike you with a thrust of a dagger or an overhead stab, you will defend yourself by taking his right arm with your right hand in reverse and with your left hand you will grab the elbow mentioned above, tightening and twisting it towards the ground, as you see, throwing your left leg in front behind your enemy's right, bending and pushing his right arm downwards towards your left side, and your left hand you will push towards your right side, so that he will be forced to turn his back to you, and without turning you will break the arm of the aforementioned enemy and be safe from such danger.

[51] (P323.S0)
Tenth Grip.

[52] (P323.S1)
When you are attacked by someone who has a dagger in hand and you have one like him, you will position yourself with your left leg forward, standing firmly, keeping your eye fixed on his arm, not moving at all. For as your enemy pulls back to strike you with wounds, you will defend yourself by taking his right arm with your left hand in a reverse grip, as you see, giving him a twist backward with your left hand, and you will be able to inflict wounds upon him.

[53] (P324.S0)
Eleventh Grip.

[54] (P324.S1)
We must consider in this eleventh technique that if someone comes forward with their left arm and foot, as you see, to strike you with wounds, you must think that they come in this manner so that you cannot seize their right arm; and seeing this, you will take with your left hand their arm near the wrist as mentioned above, and with your right hand you will grasp their elbow, pulling or throwing in such a way that you place your left leg forward of your right, and immediately in passing you will twist the arm of your enemy with both your hands, turning strongly, and in this way you will have escaped death, and by this technique you will either turn their back or break their arm.

[55] (P325.S0)
Twelfth Grip.

[56] (P325.S1)
Now note that if you find yourself without a weapon in hand and your enemy has one in hand, intending to strike you with a blow, you shall throw your left leg forward, outside the line of your enemy, and in doing so, with your left hand, you will seize his right arm, simultaneously thrusting your right hand, with both hands gripping the aforementioned arm, pivoting upon your feet. And note that in such a pivoting, you will place his right arm upon your left shoulder, turning your back to him, and know that by such a turning, he will either drop his weapon or you will break his arm.

[57] (P326.S0)
Thirteenth Grip.

[58] (P326.S1)
Having in this thirteenth part your enemy's weapons at hand as you see, not wishing to flee, you will stand firm on your feet, watching his hands: you will see the movement that the aforementioned will make, for as he draws a thrust towards your chest, you will defend yourself by seizing with your left hand his right arm and with your right hand you will take his weapon from his hand to his dismay, giving him a twist to the reverse, placing in these times your left leg against the right of the aforementioned, strongly extended to the right: watching the figure you will learn, you will take his weapon from his hand and you will be safe.

[59] (P327.S0)
Fourteenth Hold.

[60] (P327.S1)
When you are unarmed and face your enemy, you will set your right foot back, and with your left hand, you will meet the right of the aforementioned, keeping a strong eye on his right arm. For when he attempts to strike you with wounds, you will defend yourself with your right hand, simultaneously taking hold of his right arm from above, and with your left hand, you will seize his weapon in reverse between you and your enemy, giving him a twist at that moment. And know that this twist or turn of the fist that you make must be directed inward, towards the right side of the enemy, and by doing so, you will disarm him to his dismay.

[61] (P328.S0)
Fifteenth Hold.

[62] (P328.S1)
In this fifteenth capture, there would be many things to write about, but because these captures are so difficult to write, I will briefly write about them as much as I can.

[63] (P328.S2)
Thus, if there were one who came towards you with a dagger or stiletto or small knife to strike you from above, you would defend yourself by seizing his right arm with your right hand, while at the same time accompanying this movement with your right foot, not stopping at anything as you pivot on your right foot and turn your back to the aforementioned enemy, throwing your left leg to the right behind you, towards the right side of the aforementioned enemy, and in this throw, you will seize the right leg of your enemy with your left arm, and by doing this, you will throw him to the ground, or he will fall back, or you will take him away, as you see.

[64] (P329.S0)
Tenth Hold.

[65] (P329.S1)
We must note the sixteenth play: now pay close attention, that if it were an enemy of yours, who with his left hand were to strike you in the chest to stab you with a dagger in hand, you would dissolve by striking him indeed with your arms together on his left arm as mentioned above: but note that by doing this you would be resolved and would be safe and defended, notifying every person that they should always observe how the figures stand, so that they may better and more clearly learn to offend and defend.

[66] (P330.S0)
Seventeenth Hold.

[67] (P330.S1)
We shall therefore say that seeing your enemy with a weapon in hand, as you see here, it is necessary for your defense that you throw your left hand to his right arm, taking him by the reverse of the arm of your aforementioned enemy, and with your right hand you will seize the stiletto, immediately giving him a great twist backward towards his parts: with both hands you will take the weapons from his hand to his dismay and you will inflict wounds upon him as mentioned above, and in this way you will kill him.

[68] (P331.S0)
Eighteenth Grip.

[69] (P331.S1)
In this eighteenth hold, if you have observed well, this figure has the weapons under hand, and therefore it is necessary that when one approaches his enemy, it is wise to watch their hands, so that one can defend oneself better; but few have such vision, because they have not practiced with those who have given them such instruction; thus, you must be very careful, always watching the right hand of the aforementioned, for when he draws a point under hand, your enemy, aiming to strike you in the chest, you will defend yourself by taking with your right hand the right hand of the aforementioned, swiftly passing your left leg behind both of the enemy's legs, taking in that motion the beard or hair with your left hand from behind as you see, and as soon as this is done, you will pull him back and throw him to the ground: by taking his weapon from hand, you will be safe and you can kill him, so do not mock these holds, for whoever knows how to execute them will not be harmed.

[70] (P332.S0)
Decimanona Grip.

[71] (P332.S1)
We shall address a very subtle doubt in this part, for wishing to make a hold at this time that will be very useful and commendable to everyone, and you will emerge without danger from your enemy's hand, it is necessary that when the aforementioned comes against you with the weapon in hand to grapple or to inflict wounds, you shall defend yourself by taking with your left hand the right arm of the aforementioned from above and with your right hand you will seize his left arm, holding it strong and tight. And immediately in such a hold, you shall let yourself fall to the ground backward, placing both your feet upon his body or chest in such a fall: pulling his arms towards you and with your feet you will throw him backward over his head, and by this throw you will break his head and cause him great harm. Rising up quickly and taking away his weapons, as it appears to you, you will be able to grapple him.

[72] (P333.S0)
Twenty-First Hold.

[73] (P333.S1)
It will be a beautiful doubt and a gentle thing to observe in this twentieth play how a knight armed should defend himself from an enemy who comes to kill him: this is what we must consider, that wishing to find a man his enemy to kill him safely, one must first think, fundamentally, with great advantage and skill to use art, not fearing and not thinking already of the danger, but rather to estimate it, not out of fear, but to better be able to overcome it; paying attention that when the said enemy comes, with his left arm covering in front, and his left leg advancing, throwing his left hand into his cloak, coming forward, holding you tight to kill you or to wound you, then with swiftness you will defend yourself, taking the said left arm with both hands, pirouetting immediately and turning at the same time on your feet, understanding that your face should be turned opposite to that of the enemy, and by doing this, his back will be turned towards your back, and for this taking and turning that you will have done, his left arm will be on your right shoulder in this sudden act, not fearing you anything to make this generous play, because you will overcome your enemy and break his arm and deal him a great offense.

[74] (P334.S0)
Twenty-first Hold.

[75] (P334.S1)
We shall describe here how one should defend oneself in this twenty-first play: we must think very carefully that when an enemy comes deliberately to kill you, or to wound you, with a dagger, as depicted here, seeing such a thing you will come to protect yourself, taking the arm that he has thrust into your chest, with your left hand, and with your right arm you will strike him, keeping your fist tight, as you see, and hit him hard in his left arm, and you will be freed from your aforementioned enemy, gallant and polished.

[76] (P335.S0)
Twenty-second Hold.

[77] (P335.S1)
We shall say in this last hold a few words: truly, it is tedious to compose and to want to narrate point by point every matter would be too long to write; but in order not to give too much tedium to the people who will read here, we shall say to you, Master Giovanbattista, as the son above named, from the Beds of Bologna, that being you without arms in hand and if one were to come to you, a dagger or small knife in hand, to kill you, it is necessary that you defend yourself by taking with your left hand the right arm of your enemy, near the fist, and with your right hand you will grasp the said arm and the elbow thereof in reverse, as you see, with both hands, twisting one outward and the other inward: when you do this, step forward with your left foot and by twisting strongly you will break the right arm of the enemy, taking away his weapon immediately, and you will be able to give him wounds; and here we shall put an end to these aforementioned holds, all to the praise and glory of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.

[78] (P335.S2)
Amen.

