MASTER: Nicoletto Giganti
SOURCE BOOK: nicoletto giganti__rapier
FIELD NAME: First Edition(1606)[edit]Transcribed byJeff Vansteenkiste
TOTAL TEXTOS: 136
================================================================================

[1] (P21.S0)
[ 02 ] OF THE GUARDS AND COUNTERGUARDS.

[2] (P21.S1)
IF ONE wishes to make oneself a professor of the science of arms, it is necessary to know many things; and to give beginning to these my lessons, I shall first begin to treat of the guards and counter-guards, or we may say the postures and counter-postures of the sword; and this, because when one comes to some accident of question, it is necessary to first know this in order to secure oneself against the enemy.

[3] (P21.S2)
To want to take guard, many things must be observed, as can be seen in these figures of mine; and it is the standing firm upon the feet, which are the base and foundation of the whole body, in a proper stance, more often narrow than wide, for the ability to advance: to hold the sword and the dagger firmly in the hands: the dagger now high, now low, now extended; the sword now high, now low; now to the right side in a constant act of defense and attack, so that by striking the enemy, either with the point or with the edge, one can defend and strike at the same time, with the body prepared and ready; for lacking the disposition and readiness of it, it will be an easy thing for the enemy to put it out of order, either with a thrust, or with a cut; or with a point, or in another manner; and such a one, although he may defend himself, would remain in danger.

[4] (P21.S3)
He must be warned that the dagger watches the enemy's sword, for if the enemy strikes, it counters, and that the sword always aims at the uncovered part of the enemy; so that by striking, the enemy remains wounded.

[5] (P21.S4)
And this is all the artifice of this profession.

[6] (P21.S5)
Moreover, it must be noted that all the movements of the sword are guards to those who know how to recognize them; and all the guards, for those who practice, are good; just as, on the contrary, to those who do not understand any movement or guard; and because they do not know how to use them, they are not good.

[7] (P22.S0)
This profession seeks nothing other than knowledge and practice, and this practiced gives knowledge.

[8] (P22.S1)
To expose oneself in guard is an artifice, and this is done so that the enemy, when striking, may become disordered and remain in danger; likewise, to take cover is an artifice, for by closing in on the enemy one may strike; in such a manner it can be understood that every guard is beneficial to one who understands and knows; and to one who does not understand and know, no guard is of value; and this is what pertains to the guards.

[9] (P23.S0)
As for the counter-guards, it should be noted that one who has knowledge of this profession will never assume a guard, but will seek to position himself against the guards; and when wanting to position himself against the guards, it is important to observe this: one must place oneself out of measure, that is, at a distance, with the sword and the dagger held high, strong with the body, and with a firm and steady step; then consider the guard of the enemy; thereafter, approach him slowly while tightening the sword to secure his own, that is, by resting the sword almost against his, so that it covers him, preventing him from striking unless he draws his sword: the reason is this, that in drawing, he creates two effects: first, he draws; here is the first action, then he strikes; here is the second; while he draws, in that very moment he may be wounded in many ways, as will be seen in the figures of this book of mine, before he has time to strike; if he changes guard for the counter-guard, one must follow him with the sword forward, and with the long dagger, always securing his own sword, for he will always, in the first action, have to draw his sword and will be left open to being wounded, and he cannot strike unless with two actions; from which it will always be very easy to defend oneself: and this is concerning the guards and counter-guards.

[10] (P24.S0)
[ 04 ] OF TIME AND MEASURE.

[11] (P24.S1)
NOT for knowing how to take guard, or against the guard, nor for knowing how to thrust, a feint, a straight strike, or a winding strike; nor for knowing how to make hand knots, nor for carrying the body well, nor for better mastering the sword, can one be said to know how to defend and to wound: but for knowing the timing and the measure, which those who do not know, although they may defend and may wound, cannot be said to know how to defend and wound; because in both defending and wounding one can err and fall into a thousand dangers.

[12] (P25.S0)
Having thus dealt with the guards and counter-guards, it remains to discuss the timing and the measure, in order to know how to adapt oneself to understand when one must defend and strike.

[13] (P26.S0)
The measure, therefore, is understood when with the sword one can reach the enemy; and when one cannot, it is understood to be out of measure.

[14] (P27.S0)
The timing is known in this way: if the enemy is in guard, one must step out of measure, and go with his guard, ensuring oneself from the enemy's sword with one's own, and pay attention to what he intends to do:

[15] (P28.S0)
If he draws, in drawing one can wound him, and this is the time: if he changes guard, while he changes it is time: if he turns, it is time: if he closes in to come within measure, while he walks before he reaches measure, it is time to wound him: if he strikes, to defend and wound at the same time, this is also time: if the enemy stands firm in guard waiting, go to close in on him, and as you are in measure strike where he is exposed, it is time; for in every motion of dagger, of sword, of foot, and of life, such as changing guard, it is time.

[16] (P28.S1)
In such a way that all these things are times; for they contain different intervals; and while the enemy makes one of these movements, without a doubt, he must remain wounded; for while he moves, he cannot strike.

[17] (P28.S2)
And this is necessary to know in order to strike and to defend; which I shall more distinctly show, as it should be done in my figures.

[18] (P29.S0)
[ 07 ] Of the manner of delivering the Stoccata.

[19] (P29.S1)
NOW that we have discussed guards and counter-guards, measures, and timings, it is necessary to demonstrate and make clear how one should carry the life to deliver a thrust and save oneself; for to learn this art, it is essential to first know how to carry the life and deliver long thrusts, as seen in this figure: and all lies in delivering long, quick, strong thrusts, and immediately retreating out of measure.

[20] (P29.S2)
To deliver the long thrust, one must position oneself with a proper and strong step, rather short rather than long, in order to extend, and while delivering the thrust, extend the arm of the sword, bending the knee as much as possible.

[21] (P29.S3)
The true way to deliver the thrust is that after having taken guard, one must first extend the arm, and then advance with the body at the same time, so that the thrust arrives before the enemy is aware; for if one were to advance the body first, the enemy would notice it, and thus by taking advantage of the timing, could defend himself and strike in the same moment.

[22] (P30.S0)
In retreating, one must first draw back the head, for behind the head will follow the waist, and then the foot; for if one brings back the foot first while the head remains forward and the waist ahead, they remain in great danger.

[23] (P31.S0)
To truly learn this art well, one must first practice delivering this thrust, for knowing this will easily allow one to learn the rest; conversely, without this knowledge, one will struggle. I advise the esteemed readers that I will refer to this method of delivering the thrust many times throughout my lessons as the time permits. I do this to ensure a better understanding of the lesson, so that it is not said to me that I repeat the same thing many times.

[24] (P32.S0)
Because I begin with the Sword alone.

[25] (P32.S1)
In this my first book of arms, I have proposed to treat of only two kinds of weapons; namely, the sword alone, and the sword and dagger, reserving to discuss in some others that, pleasing to the Lord, I shall publish as soon as possible of every sort of arms.

[26] (P32.S2)
And because the sword is the most common and the most used weapon of all the others, I wanted to begin with it: for he who knows how to play well with the sword will also know how to handle a little of every other kind of weapon.

[27] (P32.S3)
But since it is not customary in every part of the world to carry the dagger, the targe, or the buckler; and since it often happens that one must fight with the sword alone; I urge everyone to first learn to play with the sword alone, even though in certain situations they may have the dagger, the targe, or the buckler; for it may occur, as often happens, that when the dagger, targe, or buckler falls from the hand, a man can still defend himself and wound the enemy with the sword alone; for he who practices playing with the sword alone will know how to defend and strike just as well as if he had a sword and dagger.

[28] (P33.S0)
[ 10 ] GUARDS, OR POSTURES.

[29] (P33.S1)
There are many guards of the single sword, and many also the counter-guards.

[30] (P33.S2)
In this my first book, I shall teach nothing else but two kinds of guards and counter-guards; of which you may make use for every lesson of the figures in this book.

[31] (P33.S3)
First, therefore, before you proceed to do what you have in mind, you must go to bind the enemy out of measure, ensuring yourself from his sword by placing yours upon his, so that he cannot wound you except in two times: one will be the drawing of the sword, and the other the wounding you; and in this manner, you will accommodate yourself against all guards, whether high or low, according to how you see your enemy positioned; always being careful not to give the enemy any opportunity or occasion to wound you in a single time; and this you will be if you ensure that the point of his sword is not between your life, so that by pushing quickly and strongly forward with his sword, he cannot wound you.

[32] (P33.S4)
You will therefore cover the enemy's sword with yours, as you see in this figure, so that the enemy's sword is outside of your life, and cannot harm you, unless he draws his sword. You will position yourself with strong feet, steady with your body, with the arm of the sword extended, and strong to defend and strike, as the figure shows you; for if you see the enemy in a high or low guard, and you do not position yourself against that guard of his, and do not secure yourself from the enemy's sword; you would be in danger, even if your enemy had less skill and less practice than you: for you could engage, and both get hurt; or he could put you in a guard, or in obedience, with feints, or with sword draws, or other things that can be done; for if you secure yourself from the enemy's sword, as I mentioned above, he will not be able to move, nor make any action, that you will not notice, and you will have the opportunity to defend yourself.

[33] (P34.S0)
These figures that are here will be two guards with the swords in front, and two counter-guards with the covering of the sword; one is made by advancing to close in on the enemy from the inside, and the other by moving from the outside, as these figures show you, and as I will go on to demonstrate in the following lessons.

[34] (P35.S0)
[ 13 ] DECLARATION OF STRIKING OF TIME.

[35] (P35.S1)
I teach this figure to strike your enemy at the moment he draws his sword; and you will do this by moving to close in on the enemy beyond measure, placing your sword over his in the inside line, as the figure of the first guard shows you, so that he cannot strike you unless he draws his sword; and then at that very moment he draws to strike you, thrust your sword forward, turning at the same time the knot of your hand, so that you will strike him in the face, as seen in the figure.

[36] (P35.S2)
If by chance you wanted to parry and then strike, it would not succeed; for the enemy would have time to parry, and you would be in danger: but if you, at the moment he draws his sword, immediately step forward with yours, turning the knot of your hand to parry; the enemy will find it difficult to defend himself.

[37] (P36.S0)
And in case the enemy does not draw his sword to strike you, I want you to go and close in within measure; and immediately thrust at him where he is uncovered; retreating back out of measure, placing your sword upon his.

[38] (P37.S0)
[ 15 ] THE TRUE WAY TO APPROACH AND ENGAGE THE ENEMY, AND STRIKE HIM, while drawing the Sword.

[39] (P37.S1)
Learn from this figure that if your enemy were in a guard with the Sword on the left side, high or low, approach to bind him out of measure with your Sword outside of his, with your Sword above his, just barely touching it, with a strong and proper step; with your Sword in the act of defending and striking, with a keen eye, as you see in the second Figure of the guards and counter-guards.

[40] (P37.S2)
And standing in this way arranged, your enemy will not be able to wound you with a thrust, unless he draws his sword, and while he draws, turn the hilt of your hand, and at the same time deliver a thrust, as the fourth figure teaches you; and once you have delivered this thrust, immediately at the same time step back out of measure, resting your sword upon his; so that if he were to draw again, you will return to deliver the same thrust by turning the hilt of your hand, as above, stepping back out of measure: and as many times as he draws, use the same method of turning the hilt of your hand and delivering the thrust.

[41] (P38.S0)
To truly excel in this art, one must practice diligently, for it is through this that one learns to defend and strike with skill and great swiftness; always being mindful to remain steady with the body, and to parry strongly with the strong part of your sword; for if your enemy strikes you fiercely, by parrying strongly, he will be thrown off balance, and you will be able to strike him where he is exposed.

[42] (P38.S1)
This shall be the first lesson that one must learn with the sword alone; for from this arise all the others that I have set forth in this book; and knowing how to perform this in due time teaches you to defend against all the knife strikes and all the thrusts that may come to the head, as I shall teach step by step in the following lessons.

[43] (P39.S0)
OF THE TRUE WAY TO DRAW THE SWORD.

[44] (P39.S1)
In these two figures, which we have placed above, we have taught how to strike the enemy while he draws his sword.

[45] (P39.S2)
And so that nothing remains in these my lessons that is not more than clear, I wish to show you the way to know how to draw the sword.

[46] (P39.S3)
But note that, when your enemy is positioned in any sort of guard, and you are about to engage him, strike him with a thrust where he is exposed: and if he knows as much as you do, you will always be equal with the swords.

[47] (P39.S4)
But I want you to then draw the sword beneath the enemy's guard, swiftly turning the knot of the hand, and thrusting at the same time.

[48] (P39.S5)
Where you find it uncovered, that this is the true and certain way to know how to draw the sword and strike at the same time.

[49] (P39.S6)
If you draw your sword without turning the knot of your hand, you would give time and space to the enemy to wound you; as in practicing and testing, you will see this very well.

[50] (P39.S7)
And if the enemy defends, you will return to draw in the aforementioned manner, always turning the knot of the hand, and as many times as he defends, you will draw again in the above manner, which is most secure, and then thrust him at the very same moment that you draw.

[51] (P39.S8)
And this way of drawing is no less necessary than that which we have taught in the explanation of the aforementioned figure of the way of knowing how to defend oneself; for this is the principal thing that is sought in knowing how to handle the sword alone.

[52] (P39.S9)
Therefore, I urge everyone to practice well in these two things, for when in measure against the enemy, as it is time to draw the sword, they should know how to draw it quickly and well; and when it is time to defend, they should likewise know how to defend well.

[53] (P40.S0)
[ 19 ] OF THE COUNTER-CAVATION WITHIN THE SWORD.

[54] (P40.S1)
In this Figure, I represent and show you another way to defend and strike through the means of counter-cutting; which is done in this manner: having covered the sword of your enemy, so that if he wishes to strike you, he must cut; I want you to, while he cuts, also cut back, so that your sword returns to its original position, covering that of the enemy; but in the cut that you will make, using the timing, you will deliver a thrust where he is uncovered, turning your body slightly towards the right side, and keeping your arm extended in front. If he comes to strike you, he will injure himself in the process; and once you have delivered the thrust, step back out of measure.

[55] (P41.S0)
[ 21 ] ON THE COUNTER-CUT OF THE OUTSIDE SWORD.

[56] (P41.S1)
This method of striking through the outside counter-cutting is similar to the inside counter-cutting: and the only difference is that while your enemy is in guard, and coming to press you; you being outside of measure, you must place yourself against his guard, ensuring yourself from his sword from the outside, causing the enemy to resolve to cut; and while he cuts, you at the same time cut as well, turning the tip of your sword under his, and together the knot of the hand, and resting the strong of the blade of your sword, and walking the edge of it, bringing the arm long, and extended, and loosening the waist, and lengthening the step, as seen in the figure; so that you will come to strike him, without him noticing.

[57] (P42.S0)
But be warned, that when the enemy strikes strongly with the sword, and you wish to draw yours, in order that the enemy's sword does not reach you and wound you, it is necessary that in drawing, you pull your life back, for thus you will remain safe: and supposing that the enemy has struck strongly, he will become disconcerted; and he will thus be struck by your sword; and then you will remain superior to him, able to wound him wherever it seems fit to you; always remembering to keep your sword out of your life, so that he cannot wound you.

[58] (P43.S0)
[ 23 ] OF THE FALSE DECLARATION To make it appear as if drawing the sword with the knot of the hand.

[59] (P43.S1)
There are various ways to strike, and consequently, my lessons will also be varied; however, do not expect me to recount all the things that can be done in this profession, for being infinite, my work would be too lengthy and would bring tedium to the Readers. Therefore, I will unfold those things that seem to me most beautiful, most artful, and most useful, from which many other easier and less artful ones arise.

[60] (P44.S0)
Among all the ways to strike artfully, the feint, in my opinion, surpasses all others; which is nothing more than to hint at doing one thing, and to do another; and this is done in various ways, and these are.

[61] (P44.S1)
I want you to stand up, and to the right side, with the sword in front, your arm straight extended to give your enemy the opportunity to come close to you; and as he comes within measure with you, watch if he intends to strike you with a firm foot, or to pass by; and you will recognize this by the drawing you will make with the sword; and draw the sword with the knot of your hand, and pretend to thrust him in the face; but pull wide from the enemy's sword, so that it does not find yours; if the enemy does not defend, strike it resolutely, for you will wound him; but if he defends, in his defense you draw the sword, and strike as you see in this figure, where the enemy unwittingly goes to strike you: but be careful, that in drawing you do not allow your sword to be found, for it would render your thought in vain, and in drawing, bring your head and life back a little, to see what the enemy is doing; for if he were to thrust, and you did not retreat, you would make a meeting, and both of you would be wounded.

[62] (P44.S2)
Moreover, it is necessary to be aware to walk with the straight edge of your sword against the edge of the enemy's sword, turning the wrist upwards when striking with your sword above the weak part of that of the enemy, and immediately after delivering the thrust, whether resolved or feigned, to retreat out of measure, ensuring yourself, as I have shown you above;

[63] (P45.S0)
The Feint is thus made in this manner.

[64] (P46.S0)
But if he does not go to defend, increase your step, and you will strike him; and this is the way to wound with a Feint.

[65] (P47.S0)
[ 25 ] The two following figures, although they may seem similar, are nonetheless different from one another, as they possess various ways of feinting, even though they share almost the same purpose of striking; and although it would have sufficed to include only one figure, upon which one could discourse and teach different ways of feinting to strike; yet to clearly demonstrate the different ways of feinting, I have chosen to present here two that are more distinct from each other; which I will show you in their explanations.

[66] (P48.S0)
[27] THE WAY TO STRIKE IN THE CHEST WITH THE SINGLE SWORD, WHEN I AM at measure with the swords equal.

[67] (P48.S1)
The present figure is an artful manner of wounding the enemy in the chest, and securing his sword so that he cannot harm you while you pass to strike him; and it is done in this manner: you must take guard with your sword from the left side in front: and if the enemy comes to close with you, and covers your sword with his; let him come until he finds himself in measure with you; and as he is in measure with you, you draw, placing your sword inside his, directing the point towards the enemy's face; and if he does not go to defend himself, you wound him resolutely, advancing as I have said above with the true edge of your sword against the edge of his, turning the wrist, and bringing the body somewhat sideways.

[68] (P48.S2)
But if the enemy, while you are cutting, comes to defend himself and to strike you; do not withdraw the point: but keep it somewhat out, and at the same time that he wishes to defend and strike, draw your sword under the coverings of his, and make it aim at the enemy's chest, for thus you will give him a sure blow to the chest, slightly increasing with the sword, as you see in the present figure.

[69] (P49.S0)
warning to draw it and recover it at the same time, never holding it still, so that the enemy does not deceive it; and in the movement he shows to the guard, you pass it with your life on the outside, being careful to place your hand on the hilt of the sword; which, when passed, has this effect, that it takes away his power to strike you, and you can strike him as and where you wish and please.

[70] (P50.S0)
[ 29 ] OF THE PASSING WITH A FEINT AT A DISTANCE.

[71] (P50.S1)
THIS is an artful manner of passing over the enemy, so that he does not perceive it; and it is of great consideration for the effect it shows, as can be seen in the present figure, where one passes with a feint, and goes to strike the enemy; and it is done in this way.

[72] (P50.S2)
One must see in what guard your enemy places himself, and how he has positioned himself; go to close in on him in guard, directing the point of your sword towards his face. And when you find yourselves almost in measure, and see that he is waiting and does not move, thrust strongly at his face, as shown in figure number... And if he does not defend himself well, you will achieve the effect of figure number... and will have to make other feints; but if he does defend, you will both be equal with your swords, and immediately step back out of measure, and return to the same initial guard. And as you are almost in measure, pretend to thrust at his face with the same point; and while he goes to defend it, draw with the hilt of your hand under the enemy's sword hilt the point of your sword, being careful to keep the enemy's sword out of your body, and then at the same time pass, walking with your sword over the crossguard of his, accompanying it with your left hand; and immediately place it over the hilt of the enemy's sword, so that he does not deliver a backhand to your face, for without doubt you will wound him, and he will not notice it at all. And having done this, you will jump out of measure, and reinsert your sword into that of the enemy, securing yourself as described above, and striking his sword, you will return to wound him with two or three decisive and irreparable thrusts.

[73] (P51.S0)
Of the Feint over the Point of the Sword.

[74] (P51.S1)
This is another kind of disengagement, and of feint not often employed, which serves to produce the effects of these two previously mentioned figures: and it is done thus; You must assume guard with the sword at your left side, with the arm extended and straight; and let the enemy come to close with you in the manner described; and as he is within measure, disengage your sword over the point of his; and if you see that he does not defend, strike him hard and resolutely, as I have told you, for you will not need to make any other feint; but if he does defend, do not stop with your sword; rather, disengage the guard of the enemy's sword, and pass in the manner above, and you will strike him in the chest, then retreat as has been said.

[75] (P52.S0)
[ 31 ] OF THE FEINT AT A DISTANCE IN THE FACE.

[76] (P52.S1)
THIS Feint is not different in any other way, except that the first has its hollowing beneath the sword's hilt, and this one has it above to strike at the enemy's face; which thrust, if he defends, goes feigned, and if he does not defend, it is resolved.

[77] (P52.S2)
In the rest, one observes the same guards, the same distances, and the same measures; and likewise, one holds the sword and the blade, as seen in the figure, and as soon as the point is drawn, one returns out of measure; The greatest importance is knowing how to make the natural feint, which cannot be distinguished from the resolved one.

[78] (P52.S3)
Which is done in this manner.

[79] (P52.S4)
The point is turned (this being, for example) from above on the outside towards the face, and in the movement that is made, with the point beneath the hilt of the enemy's sword to strike him within, it is necessary to ensure that the point strikes with the hollow in the face or in the chest.

[80] (P52.S5)
And this is understood as the most natural feint; but take care not to feint ever, if the enemy does not go to the guard of the resolved, for you would be in danger of injuring each other and you would remain in peril.

[81] (P53.S0)
[ 33 ] THE TRUE WAY TO DELIVER A POINT OF THE SWORD ALONE WHILE THE ENEMY STRIKES WITH A KNIFE.

[82] (P53.S1)
This Figure teaches you to take advantage of the time to deliver a thrust to the face of your enemy, while he raises his sword, if you can strike him while his sword is in the air, and before it reaches you.

[83] (P53.S2)
And as this is done, take note.

[84] (P53.S3)
After you have placed yourself in whatever guard you prefer, you will go to close in on your enemy, and as you come within measure, if the enemy were to strike at your head with a knife, you, in raising your sword, will take advantage of the timing, and step forward, and strike him with your sword in the face, for without a doubt you will hit him, while the enemy's sword is in the air, as you see in the figure; but in your strike, turn your wrist upwards, and the straight edge of the sword upwards, keeping your arm long and high, and ensure that the guards of your sword cover your head, so that if the enemy were to lower his sword, he finds you covered, and cannot harm you;

[85] (P54.S0)
However, one must quickly thrust this point; for if it is not done swiftly, the enemy would parry it and could wound you; and after you have thrust, quickly withdraw out of measure, ensuring yourself with your sword against that of the enemy.

[86] (P55.S0)
I did not wish to include in this my First book all the ways to defend against knife strikes, which are many; but I have included only this one, as it seems to me more useful and more convenient for knowing the timing and making use of it; which is necessary to understand in every circumstance.

[87] (P56.S0)
[ 35 ] THE TRUE WAY TO STRIKE SAFELY with the Sword alone, with both hands.

[88] (P56.S1)
THIS figure shows you a sure way to wound the enemy; which is impossible to defend against; and it is done in two manners; first, you must find the opportunity to be on equal footing with the enemy in swords, and have yours outside; and then confront your sword towards the face of the enemy, who, if he does not defend strongly, you strike him in the face, as seen in the fourth figure; but if he defends well and strongly, you will step forward with your left foot, placing your left hand over your sword, pressing hard with both hands, directing the point towards the chest of the enemy, lowering the guards of your sword, as seen in the present figure; taking care to do all these things at once.

[89] (P57.S0)
Then, once you are positioned in guard as described above; with your sword drawn inward, I want you to draw your sword in the act of striking outward; and at the same time that you draw the sword, place your left hand upon your sword, and with the strength of both hands, strike with your sword against the enemy's sword, which, when struck away, you should immediately step forward with your left foot, as you see in the figure; But in order for this to succeed well, it is necessary to pay attention to perform all these actions at once, that is, to draw the sword, place your hand upon it, strike with your sword against the enemy's sword, and step forward with your left foot; for if you do not perform all these actions at the same time.

[90] (P57.S1)
You would not succeed, and you would be in danger, as you would have to do with some skilled man who knew how to draw the sword quickly and well; therefore, for this to succeed, it must be done swiftly and unexpectedly.

[91] (P58.S0)
[ 37 ] THE TRUE WAY TO PARry THE STAB, OR REVERSE, THAT COMES FOR THE LEG.

[92] (P58.S1)
In this lesson, in which we shall discuss the forehand or reverse thrust to the leg, I can say nothing more to teach you how to parry and strike the enemy at the same time; rather, I shall explain how the enemy may be harmed by his own action from the point of your sword. If the enemy descends with a straight or a reverse strike to the leg, it is necessary for him to extend his step and his body, and to bring his face forward. And while the enemy descends to strike you, you should then bring your leg forward, lifting it behind, and at the same time thrust the point at his face, so that he, unable to defend himself, injures himself, and cannot then harm you.

[93] (P58.S2)
You will then (as I have said before) retreat beyond measure.

[94] (P59.S0)
And if, as the present lesson is very artful, it is also necessary to understand it in order to be able to make use of it on such an occasion, as the Figure clearly demonstrates to you.

[95] (P60.S0)
[ 39 ] OF THE INQUARTATA, OR THE ESCAPE OF LIFE.

[96] (P60.S1)
It is necessary to know the Inquartata, or the Avoidance, in order to dominate the body.

[97] (P60.S2)
But this is not usually used in the Schools; it is for the French to exercise life.

[98] (P60.S3)
Indeed, there are many of these Scansi, or Inquartate, but I have chosen in this my first presentation to show only three, which in my judgment are the most secure and the most beautiful, as appears in the present figure.

[99] (P61.S0)
Of the Inquartata, or the Life-Guard.

[100] (P61.S1)
It is not different in any other way this Inquartata from the first, except in the manner of striking, that is to take care when walking along the edge of the sword, aiming to strike beneath the pommel of your sword, raising the arm with the grip of the hand, as seen in the figure, and after having turned the body, to stop there, and not to rush upon the enemy, in order not to engage with him, for you would fall into danger, regarding the ability to return out of measure, and to secure yourself from him.

[101] (P61.S2)
This Inquartata is very difficult to defend against, indeed I shall say impossible, when it is executed with judgment.

[102] (P62.S0)
[ 40 ] OF THE THIRD QUARTER, or the Life Guard.

[103] (P62.S1)
This Third Quartata is the most beautiful and the safest of all, which is done in this manner.

[104] (P62.S2)
Take your guard, as in the other two, holding the sword at your right side, with your arm extended and firm: and as the enemy comes to press you with his sword upon yours, and you are in measure; draw the sword with the turn of the hand's knot: if he does not defend, strike him in the face, and you will achieve the effect of the figure, nor will you need to do anything else.

[105] (P62.S3)
But if he parries, you find yourselves with swords equal: then you strongly confront your sword above his, so that he also confronts, and as he confronts; you will step forward with the winding under the hilt of his sword, turning the body, as above, you will strike him in the chest, of which he will not be aware: and having achieved the effect of the present figure, you will then return out of measure, securing yourselves, as in the other lessons.

[106] (P63.S0)
In an artful manner of striking to the chest while facing the swords.

[107] (P63.S1)
In the past lessons, I have demonstrated the manner of the Inquartate, that is to say, how one faces the swords from the outside to strike the enemy from within; now I shall briefly explain how the swords are carried from within, and how one strikes from the outside.

[108] (P63.S2)
As you engage with the enemy, confront him boldly with the edge of your sword, keeping the point aimed at his face, and with your strong blade above his sword: If it happens that he is weaker than you, you will deliver a thrust, either to the face or to the chest, which he cannot defend against. But if he is stronger than you, sensing how your sword confronts his, draw your sword from beneath the hilt of his, causing his to fall to the ground, and he likewise holds a point from which he cannot defend himself; and at that very moment, pass through without any danger, placing your left hand on the hilt of his, you will strike him with three or four thrusts, which he cannot evade.

[109] (P63.S3)
Then return out of measure, ensuring yourself, as above.

[110] (P64.S0)
Of the manner of playing with a sword alone against a sword alone, of resolute thrusts.

[111] (P64.S1)
There are many who, in the Schools, when they wish to assault the enemy, do so resolutely by thrusting, lunging, and stabbing, nor do they give any time, always striking with fury and great force; these things usually tend to disorder every fine player and fencer; therefore, it is necessary to know in such an occasion the way to defend oneself.

[112] (P65.S0)
You must position yourself in the guard against the enemy's sword with yours in a defensive stance, and out of measure, in a step more rather restricted than long: and at the moment he strikes you with a thrust, a cut, or another similar blow, strike with the strong part of your sword against the enemy's sword, and immediately extending your step, thrust at him, and you will wound him, either in the chest or in the face, and then quickly step back with your front foot to where you were before, resting your sword against his to secure yourself from it; in such a way that he cannot wound you unless he withdraws: and if he withdraws, by turning the knots of your hand outward, return to strike with the strong part of your sword against the enemy's sword, and extending your step, thrust at him, and wound him, and quickly step back with your foot, as before, securing yourself likewise with your sword from his sword, and if he attempts to strike again, you always return to do the same.

[113] (P66.S0)
This lesson is more useful than beautiful, and it contains two times, which you can perform before the enemy has time to make one: The one is the guard, the other is the strike.

[114] (P66.S1)
Which, as you observe, you have understood.

[115] (P67.S0)
[ 43 ] ON BLOCKING THE THRUSTS THAT COME TO THE CHEST WITH THE SWORD ALONE.

[116] (P67.S1)
From this Figure, one can see the sure way to parry the thrusts that come to the chest, and to strike at the chest, which can be done in various ways, for some advance from a distance; others stand at measure; others within measure: But he who has knowledge of timing; and knows well how to parry as my figure demonstrates, will parry in all ways.

[117] (P67.S2)
Where you note, that being with your enemy with swords of equal measure, and he attempts to strike you in the chest; it is necessary that you, at that very moment, follow his sword with yours, lowering the point of your sword, while raising the hilt with your hand, and parry with the same, and step with your left foot towards the right side, moving away from his sword, and strike him in the chest, keeping your left hand above the guards of his sword.

[118] (P67.S3)
Given then that you will have the thrust, you will draw the sword in the manner described above, stepping back out of measure.

[119] (P68.S0)
[ 45 ] OF THE POINT IN THE FACE TURNING THE KNOT OF THE HAND.

[120] (P68.S1)
This figure teaches you a beautiful way to strike your enemy in the face: and it all consists in seizing the opportunity to stand with swords equal, making your enemy move to parry, instilling in him the suspicion that you intend to draw your sword: and at the same time, by turning the knot of your hand, you will place your left hand at the guard of his sword, and you will advance with your foot at the same time that you strike him in the face, as you see; nor is it possible for him to defend himself if you execute it correctly; Once you have done this, you will rise with your left hand above the fittings of the enemy's sword: and by drawing your sword, you will be able to deliver two or three thrusts, wherever you wish.

[121] (P68.S2)
Then you will retreat out of measure, always keeping your blade upon his sword, as above.

[122] (P69.S0)
[ 48 ] ON COUNTER-CAVATION AT A DISTANCE.

[123] (P69.S1)
THIS is a same counter-cut, at a distance of one, that would be in less than a foot, and that wished to pass from the Quartata.

[124] (P69.S2)
I wanted to demonstrate to you with this figure the stances and the striking.

[125] (P69.S3)
And so that it may be well understood, it is necessary (that when one comes to grapple with you on foot,) that you stand in guard as you see in this figure, allowing your enemy the opportunity to strike you in the chest.

[126] (P69.S4)
If he is a valiant man, he will pass quickly with his foot, and he will strongly twist the knot of his hand, in the manner of the Inquartata, to defend himself from your sword: and you at the same time that he passes, will draw your sword beneath the guard, lowering your waist, as you see in the present figure, that you will strike him in the face, before he strikes you: Moreover, while he brings his foot forward to want to pass, he will not be able to defend himself.

[127] (P69.S5)
But sometimes to achieve the effect of this figure, it is necessary to practice well in these two positions beforehand.

[128] (P70.S0)
[ 51 ] OF THE WAY TO FIGHT WITH THE SWORD ALONE, and that the enemy has a Sword and Dagger.

[129] (P70.S1)
I will demonstrate to you with this figure the parrying, and the striking with the sword alone against the enemy who has a sword and dagger.

[130] (P70.S2)
You will stand upright before with a proper stance, with your waist back, holding the sword forward, ready to parry and strike when the time is right.

[131] (P70.S3)
And one must not be the first to strike, for you will be in danger, since by striking your enemy could parry your thrust with his dagger, and you would not be able to parry his if he were a skilled man; but if you remain in guard, as I have said above in the act of parrying, showing that you fear him, so that he strikes out of order, you, while he strikes, will parry strongly with the forte of your sword, and will thrust at his face; for he will strike hard and long, and in drawing his dagger, he will move away, so that you will hit him securely, and having struck, you will quickly retreat out of measure, keeping your sword in his as described above; and whenever he strikes, you will do the same; however, be careful not to thrust at his chest, for that would not be safe, since one who has a sword and dagger will be much bolder against one who has only a sword, and thus thinking he can give you as many thrusts as he wants, he will become disordered in striking at you without thinking of anything; but if you remain in guard with judgment, you will be able to parry safely and strongly, and wound your enemy always in the face, and retreat safely with your sword over his out of measure.

[132] (P70.S4)
But if your enemy draws the sword from within; you, turning the knot of the hand, will parry, and you will strike hard, as I have said.

[133] (P71.S0)
And if you see that he wishes to come at you, by pulling back, you will strike him at that moment when he moves to come forward, and if you find yourself in guard with your sword against his, and you would first parry with the Dagger, and then strike, at that time, when you see that he lowers the Dagger to parry; and you will immediately draw your sword above the dagger in the manner described in Figure No...

[134] (P71.S1)
Then you will immediately return out of measure with yours above his sword,

[135] (P72.S0)
warning, however, that if he remains in guard, do not strike, for if by chance you do not see for a while, when you strike, he may not be able to wound you, as described above, when it concerns timing and measure.

[136] (P72.S1)
If he stands in guard waiting, either out of fear or with skill to deceive you, you will be out of measure, with your blade above his sword, and you will seek to parry and strike surely, according to the occasion.

